FILE
Name: Whi889__Whitney_SanskritGrammar.pdf
PURL: http://resolver.sub.uni-goettingen.de/purl/?gr_elib-2
Type: Searchable PDF/A (text under image); index/bookmarks
Encoding: Unicode (ā ī ū ṛ ṝ ḷ ḹ ṅ ñ ṭ ḍ ṇ ś ṣ ḥ ṃ ...), accented (ā́ ā̀ ...)
PLEASE NOTE: In the searchable background text, Whitney's diacritics have been
standardized according to the above list. Thus, your search for "ṅ" will return Whitney's
"n̄" for guttural nasal in the image text. Accordingly, your search for "ś" will return
Whitney's "ç". Whitney's "ṁ" for "assimilated­m" anusvāra (cf. §73c) has been
retained, while common anusvāra has been converted to "ṃ" (instead of Whitney's
"ṅ").
Date: 21.4.2008. REVISION #1: 16.2.2009
BRIEF RECORD
Author: Whitney, William Dwight
Title: A Sanskrit Grammar (2nd ed.)
Publ.: Leipzig : Breitkopf und Härtel 1889
Description: xxvi, 551 p.
Series: Bibliothek indogermanischer Grammatiken, 2
FULL RECORD
www.sub.uni-goettingen.de/ebene_1/fiindolo/gr_elib.htm
NOTICE
This file may be copied on the condition that its entire contents, including this data sheet,
remain intact.
A
SANSKRIT GRAMMAR,
INCLUDING BOTH THE CLASSICAL LANGUAGE, AND THE
OLDER DIALECTS, OF VEDA AND BRAHMANA.
BY
WILLIAM DWIGHT WHITNEY,
PROFESSO R O F SANSKRI T AN D COMPARATIV E PHILOLOG Y I N TAL E COLLEGE , NEW-HAVEN .
SECOND (REVISED AND EXTENDED) EDITION.
THIS WORK IS COPYRIGHT.
LEIPZIG ,
BREITKOP F AN D HÄRTEL .
LONDON , TRÜBNER & Co. 57 AND 59, LUDGATE HILL, E. C. 8.
ENTD STA. HALL.
1889 .
Copyright by W. D. Whitney, 1889.
(The Right of Translation and Reproduction is reserved.)
Printers: Breitkopf & Härtel, Leipzig.
PREFAC E
TO THE FIRST EDITION.
It was in June, 1875, as I chanced to be for a day or
two in Leipzig, that I was unexpectedly invited to prepare
the Sanskrit grammar for the Indo-European series projected
by Messrs. Breitkopf and Härtel. After some consideration,
and consultation with friends, I accepted the task, and have
since devoted to it what time could be spared from regular
duties, after the satisfaction of engagements earlier formed.
If the delay seems a long one, it was nevertheless unavoidable ; and I would gladly, in the interest of the work itself,
have made it still longer. In every such case, it is necessary to make a compromise between measurably satisfying a
present pressing need, and doing the subject fuller justice
at the cost of more time; and it seemed as if the call for
a Sanskrit grammar on a somewhat different plan from those
already in use — excellent as some of these in many respects
are — was urgent enough to recommend a speedy completion of the work begun.
The objects had especially in view in the preparation
of this grammar have been the following:
1. To make a presentation of the facts of the language
primarily as they show themselves in use in the literature,
and only secondarily as they are laid down by the native
grammarians. The earliest European grammars were by the
necessity of the case chiefly founded on their native prede-
vi PREFACE .
cessors; and a traditional method was thus established which
has been perhaps somewhat too closely adhered to, at the
expense of clearness and of proportion, as well as of scientific truth. Accordingly, my attention has not been directed
toward a profounder study of the grammatical science of the
Hindu schools: their teachings I have been contented to take
as already reported to Western learners in the existing
Western grammars.
2. To include also in the presentation the forms and
constructions of the older language, as exhibited in the Veda
and the Brāhmaṇa. Grassmann's excellent Index-Vocabulary
to the Rig-Veda, and my own manuscript one to the AtharvaVeda (which I hope soon to be able to make public*), gave
me in full detail the great mass of Vedic material; and this,
with some assistance from pupils and friends, I have sought
to complete, as far as the circumstances permitted, from the
other Vedic texts and from the various works of the Brāh¬
maṇa period, both printed and manuscript.
3. To treat the language throughout as an accented one,
omitting nothing of what is known respecting the nature of
the Sanskrit accent, its changes in combination and inflection,
and the tone of individual words — being, in all this, necessarily dependent especially upon the material presented
by the older accentuated texts.
4 . To cast all statements, classifications, and so on,
into a form consistent with the teachings of linguistic science.
In doing this, it has been necessary to discard a few of the
long-used and familiar divisions and terms of Sanskrit grammar — for example, the classification and nomenclature of
„special tenses" and "general tenses" (which is so indefensible that one can only wonder at its having maintained itself
so long), the order and terminology of the conjugation-classes,
the separation in treatment of the facts of internal and ex-
* It was published, as vol. XII. of the Journal of the American
Oriental Society, in 1881.
PREFACE . vii
ternal euphonic combination, and the like. But care has been
taken to facilitate the transition from the old to the new;
and the changes, it is believed, will commend themselves to
unqualified acceptance. It has been sought also to help an
appreciation of the character of the language by putting its
facts as far as possible into a statistical form. In this respect
the native grammar is especially deficient and misleading.
Regard has been constantly had to the practical needs
of the learner of the language, and it has been attempted,
by due arrangement and by the use of different sizes of
type, to make the work as usable by one whose object
it is to acquire a knowledge of the classical Sanskrit alone
as those are in which the earlier forms are not included.
The custom of transliterating all Sanskrit words into European characters, which has become usual in European Sanskrit grammars, is, as a matter of course, retained throughout; and, because of the difficulty of setting even a small
Sanskrit type with anything but a large European, it is
practiced alone in the smaller sizes.
While the treatment of the facts of the language has
thus been made a historical one, within the limits of the
language itself, I have not ventured to make it comparative,
by bringing in the analogous forms and processes of other
related languages. To do this, in addition to all that was
attempted beside, would have extended the work, both in
content and in time of preparation, far beyond the limits
assigned to it. And, having decided to leave out this element, I have done so consistently throughout. Explanations
of the origin of forms have also been avoided, for the same
reason and for others, which hardly call for statement.
A grammar is necessarily in great part founded on its
predecessors, and it would be in vain to attempt an acknowledgment in detail of all the aid received from other scholars. I have had at hand always especially the very scholarly and reliable brief summary of Kielhorn, the full and
viii PREFACE .
excellent work of Monier Williams, the smaller grammar of
Bopp (a wonder of learning and method for the time when
it was prepared), and the volumes of Benfey and Müller.
As regards the material of the language, no other aid, of
course, has been at all comparable with the great Petersburg lexicon of Böhtlingk and Roth, the existence of which
gives by itself a new character to all investigations of the
Sanskrit language. What I have not found there or in the
special collections made by myself or by others for me, I
have called below* "not quotable" — a provisional designation, necessarily liable to correction in detail by the results
of further researches. For what concerns the verb, its forms
and their classification and uses, I have had, as every one
must have, by far the most aid from Delbrück, in his Alt¬
indisches Verbum and his various syntactical contributions. Former pupils of my own, Professors Avery and
Edgren, have also helped me, in connection with this
subject and with others, in a way and measure that calls for
public acknowledgment. In respect to the important matter
of the declension in the earliest language, I have made great
use of the elaborate paper in the Journ. Am. Or. Soc. (printing contemporaneously with this work, and used by me
almost, but not quite, to the end of the subject) by my
former pupil Prof. Lanman; my treatment of it is founded
on his. My manifold obligations to my own teacher, Prof.
Weber of Berlin, also require to be mentioned: among other
things, I owe to him the use of his copies of certain unpublished texts of the Brāhmaṇa period, not otherwise accessible to me; and he was kind enough to look through with
me my work in its inchoate condition, favoring me with
valuable suggestions. For this last favor I have likewise to
thank Prof. Delbrück — who, moreover, has taken the trouble
to glance over for a like purpose the greater part of the
proof-sheets of the grammar, as they came from the press.
To Dr. L. von Schröder is due whatever use I have been
PREFACE . ix
able to make (unfortunately a very imperfect one) of the important Māitrāyaṇī-Sanhitā.*
Of the deficiencies of my work I am, I think, not less
fully aware than any critic of it, even the severest, is likely
to be. Should it be found to answer its intended purpose
well enough to come to another edition, my endeavor will
be to improve and complete it; and I shall be grateful for
any corrections or suggestions which may aid me in making it a more efficient help to the study of the Sanskrit
language and literature.
GOTHA, July 1879.
W. D. W.
PREFAC E
TO THE SECOND EDITION.
In preparing a new edition of this grammar, I have
made use of the new material gathered by myself during
the intervening years ** and also of that gathered by others,
so far as it was accessible to me and fitted into my plan; ***
and I have had the benefit of kind suggestions from various
quarters — for all of which I desire to return a grateful
acknowledgment. By such help, I have been able not only
to correct and repair certain errors and omissions of the
first edition, but also to speak with more definiteness upon
* Since published in full by him, 1881—6.
** A part of this new material was published by myself in 1885,
as a Supplement to the grammar, under the title "Roots, Verb-Forms,
and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language".
*** Especially deserving of mention is Holtzmann's collection of
material from the Mahābhārata, also published (1884) in the form of
a Supplement to this work; also Böhtlingk's similar collection from
the larger half of the Rāmāyaṇa.
x PREFACE .
very many points relating to the material and usages of
the language.
In order not to impair the applicability of the references already made to the work by various authors, its paragraphing has been retained unchanged throughout; for increased convenience of further reference, the subdivisions
of paragraphs have been more thoroughly marked, by letters
(now and then changing a former lettering); and the paragraph-numbers have been set at the outer instead of the
inner edge of the upper margin.
My remoteness from the place of publication has forbidden me the reading of more than one proof; but the
kindness of Professor Lanman in adding his revision (accompanied by other timely suggestions) to mine, and the
care of the printers, will be found, I trust, to have aided
in securing a text disfigured by few errors of the press.
Circumstances beyond my control have delayed for a
year or two the completion of this revision, and have made
it in some parts less complete than I should have desired.
NEW-HAVEN, Sept. 1888.
W. D. W.
INTRODUCTION.
BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE INDIAN LITERATURE.
It seems desirable to give here such a sketch of the
history of Indian literature as shall show the relation to
one another of the different periods and forms of the language treated in the following grammar, and the position
of the works there quoted.
The name "Sanskrit" (saṁskṛta, 1087 d, adorned, elaborated, perfected), which is popularly applied to the whole
ancient and sacred language of India, belongs more properly
only to that dialect which, regulated and established by the
labors of the native grammarians, has led for the last two
thousand years or more an artificial life, like that of the
Latin during most of the same period in Europe, as the
written and spoken means of communication of the learned
and priestly caste; and which even at the present day fills
that office. It is thus distinguished, on the one hand, from
the later and derived dialects — as the Prakrit, forms of
language which have datable monuments from as early as
the third century before Christ, and which are represented
by inscriptions and coins, by the speech of the uneducated
characters in the Sanskrit dramas (see below), and by a
limited literature; the Pali, a Prakritic dialect which became
the sacred language of Buddhism in Farther India, and is
xii INTRODUCTION.
still in service there as such; and yet later and more altered
tongues forming the transition to the languages of modern
India. And, on the other hand, it is distinguished, but
very much less sharply and widely, from the older dialects
or forms of speech presented in the canonical literature,
the Veda and Brāhmaṇa.
This fact, of the fixation by learned treatment of an
authorized mode of expression, which should thenceforth be
used according to rule in the intercourse of the educated,
is the cardinal one in Indian linguistic history; and as the
native grammatical literature has determined the form of
the language, so it has also to a large extent determined
the grammatical treatment of the language by European
scholars.
Much in the history of the learned movement is still
obscure, and opinions are at variance even as to points of
prime consequence. Only the concluding works in the development of the grammatical science have been preserved to
us; and though they are evidently the perfected fruits of a
long series of learned labors, the records of the latter are
lost beyond recovery. The time and the place of the creation of Sanskrit are unknown; and as to its occasion, we
have only our inferences and conjectures to rely upon. It
seems, however, altogether likely that the grammaticalsense
of the ancient Hindus was awakened in great measure by
their study of the traditional sacred texts, and by their comparison of its different language with that of contemporary
use. It is certain that the grammatical study of those texts
(śākhās, lit'ly branches), phonetic and other, was zealously
and effectively followed in the Brahmanic schools; this is
attested by our possession of a number of phonetico-gram¬
matical treatises, prātiśākhyas (prati śākhām belonging to
each several text), each having for subject one principal
Vedic text, and noting all its peculiarities of form; these,
both by the depth and exactness of their own researches
and by the number of authorities which they quote, speak
plainly of a lively scientific activity continued during a long
time. What part, on the other hand, the notice of differ-
INTRODUCTION. xiii
ences between the correct speech of the learned and the
altered dialects of the vulgar may have borne in the same
movement is not easy to determine; but it is not customary
that a language has its proper usages fixed by rule until
the danger is distinctly felt of its undergoing corruption.
The labors of the general school of Sanskrit grammar
reached a climax in the grammarian Pāṇini, whose text-book,
containing the facts of the language cast into the highly
artful and difficult form of about four thousand algebraicformula-like rules (in the statement and arrangement of
which brevity alone is had in view, at the cost of distinctness and unambiguousness), became for all after time the
authoritative, almost sacred, norm of correct speech. Respecting his period, nothing really definite and trustworthy
is known; but he is with much probability held to have
lived some time (two to four centuries) before the Christian
era. He has had commentators in abundance, and has undergone at their hands some measure of amendment and completion; but he has not been overthrown or superseded.
The chief and most authoritative commentary on his work
is that called the Māhābhāshya great comment, by Pa¬
tanjali.
A language, even if not a vernacular one. which is in
tolerably wide and constant use for writing and speaking,
is, of course, kept in life principally by direct tradition, by
communication from teacher to scholar and the study and
imitation of existing texts, and not by the learning of grammatical rules; yet the existence of grammatical authority,
and especially of a single one, deemed infallible and of prescriptive value, could not fail to exert a strong regulative
influence, leading to the avoidance more and more of what
was, even if lingering in use, inconsistent with his teachings,
and also, in the constant reproduction of texts, to the gradual effacement of whatever they might contain that was
unapproved. Thus the whole more modern literature of
India has been Paninized, so to speak, pressed into the
mould prepared by him and his school. What are the
limits of the artificiality of this process is not yet known.
xiv INTRODUCTION.
The attention of special students of the Hindu grammar
(and the subject is so intricate and difficult that the number
is exceedingly small of those who have mastered it sufficiently to have a competent opinion on such general matters)
has been hitherto mainly directed toward determining what
the Sanskrit according to Pāṇini really is, toward explaining
the language from the grammar. And, naturally enough,
in India, or wherever else the leading object is to learn to
speak and write the language correctly — that is, as authorized by the grammarians — that is the proper course to
pursue. This, however, is not the way really to understand
the language. The time must soon come, or it has come
already, when the endeavor shall be instead to explain the
grammar from the language: to test in all details, so far
as shall be found possible, the reason of Pāṇini's rules
(which contain not a little that seems problematical, or even
sometimes perverse); to determine what and how much
genuine usage he had everywhere as foundation, and what
traces may be left in the literature of usages possessing an
inherently authorized character, though unratified by him.
By the term "classical" or "later" language, then, as
constantly used below in the grammar, is meant the language of those literary monuments which are written in conformity with the rules of the native grammar: virtually, the
whole proper Sanskrit literature. For although parts of this
are doubtless earlier than Pāṇini, it is impossible to tell
just what parts, or how far they have escaped in their style
the leveling influence of the grammar. The whole, too,
may be called so far an artificial literature as it is written
in a phonetic form (see grammar, 101 a) which never can
have been a truly vernacular and living one. Nearly all of
it is metrical: not poetic works only, but narratives, histories
(so far as anything deserving that name can be said to exist),
and scientific treatises of every variety, are done into verse;
a prose and a prose literature hardly has an existence (the
principal exceptions, aside from the voluminous commentaries, are a few stories, as the Daśakumāracarita and the
Vāsavadattā). Of linguistic history there is next to nothing
INTRODUCTION. xv
in it all; but only a history of style, and this for the most
part showing a gradual depravation, an increase of artificiality
and an intensification of certain more undesirable features
of the language — such as the use of passive constructions
and of participles instead of verbs, and the substitution of
compounds for sentences.
This being the condition of the later literature, it is of
so much the higher consequence that there is an earlier
literature, to which the suspicion of artificiality does not
attach, or attaches at least only in a minimal degree, which
has a truly vernacular character, and abounds in prose as
well as verse.
The results of the very earliest literary productiveness
of the Indian people are the hymns with which, when they
had only crossed the threshold of the country, and when
their geographical horizon was still limited to the riverbasin of the Indus with its tributaries, they praised their
gods, the deified powers of nature, and accompanied the
rites of their comparatively simple worship. At what period
these were made and sung cannot be determined with any
approach to accuracy: it may have been as early as 200 0
B. C. They were long handed down by oral tradition, preserved by the care, and increased by the additions and
imitations, of succeeding generations; the mass was ever
growing, and, with the change of habits and beliefs and
religious practices, was becoming variously applied — sung
in chosen extracts, mixed with other material into liturgies,
adapted with more or less of distortion to help the needs
of a ceremonial which was coming to be of immense elaboration and intricacy. And, at some time in the course
of this history, there was made for preservation a great collection of the hymn-material, mainly its oldest and most
genuine part, to the extent of over a thousand hymns and ten
thousand verses, arranged according to traditional authorship
and to subject and length and metre of hymn: this collection
is the Rig-Veda Veda of verses (ṛo) or of hymns. Other
collections were made also out of the same general mass
of traditional material: doubtless later, although the inter-
xvi INTRODUCTION.
relations of this period are as yet too unclear to allow of
our speaking with entire confidence as to anything concerning them. Thus, the Sāma-Veda Veda of chants(sāman),
containing only about a sixth as much, its verses nearly all
found in the Rig-Veda also, but appearing here with numerous differences of reading: these were passages put together
for chanting at the soma-sacrifices. Again, collections called
by the comprehensive name of Yajur-Veda Veda of sacrificial formulas (yajus): these contained not verses alone,
but also numerous prose utterances, mingled with the former,
in the order in which they were practically employed in
the ceremonies; they were strictly liturgical collections. Of
these, there are in existence several texts, which have their
mutual differences: the Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā (in two slightly
discordant versions, Mādhyandina and Kāṇva), sometimes
also called the White Yajur-Veda; and the various and
considerably differing texts of the Black Yajur-Veda, namely
the Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā, the Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā, the Kapiṣ¬
ṭhala-Saṁhitā, and the Kāṭhaka (the two last not yet published). Finally, another historical collection, like the RigVeda, but made up mainly of later and less accepted
material, and called (among other less current names) the
Atharva-Veda Veda of the Atharvans (a legendary priestly
family); it is somewhat more than half as bulky as the RigVeda, and contains a certain amount of material corresponding to that of the latter, and also a number of brief prose
passages. To this last collection is very generally refused
in the orthodox literature the name of Veda; but for us it
is the most interesting of all, after the Rig-Veda, because
it contains the largest amount of hymn-material (or mantra,
as it is called, in distinction from the prose brāhmaṇa),
and in a language which, though distinctly less antique
than that of the other, is nevertheless truly Vedic. Two
versions of it are extant, one of them in only a single
known manuscript.
A not insignificant body of like material, and of various
period (although doubtless in the main belonging to the
latest time of Vedic productiveness, and in part perhaps
INTRODUCTION. xvii
the imitative work of a yet more modern time), is scattered
through the texts to be later described, the Brāhmaṇas and
the Sūtras. To assemble and sift and compare it is now
one of the pressing needs of Vedic study.
The fundamental divisions of the Vedic literature here
mentioned have all had their various schools of sectaries,
each of these with a text of its own, showing some differences from those of the other schools: but those mentioned
above are all that are now known to be in existence; and
the chance of the discovery of others grows every year
smaller.
The labor of the schools in the conservation of their
sacred texts was extraordinary, and has been crowned with
such success that the text of each school, whatever may
be its differences from those of other schools, is virtually
without various readings, preserved with all its peculiarities
of dialect, and its smallest and most exceptional traits of
phonetic form, pure and unobscured. It is not the place
here to describe the means by which, in addition to the
religious care of the sectaries, this accuracy was secured:
forms of text, lists of peculiarities and treatises upon them,
and so on. When this kind of care began in the case of
each text, and what of original character may have been
effaced before it, or lost in spite of it, cannot be told. But
it is certain that the Vedic records furnish, on the whole,
a wonderfully accurate and trustworthy picture of a form of
ancient Indian language (as well as ancient Indian beliefs
and institutions) which was a natural and undistorted one,
and which goes back a good way behind the classical Sanskrit. Its differences from the latter the following treatise
endeavors to show in detail.
Along with the verses and sacrificial formulas and
phrases in the text of the Black Yajur-Veda are given
long prose sections, in which the ceremonies are described,
their meaning and the reason of the details and the accompanying utterances are discussed and explained, illustrative
legends are reported or fabricated, and various speculations,
etymological and other, are indulged in. Such matter comes
xviii INTRODUCTION.
to be called brahmaṇa (apparently relating to the brahman
or worship). In the White Yajur-Veda, it is separated into
a work by itself, beside the saṁhitā or text of verses and
formulas, and is called the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa Brāhmana
of a hundred ways. Other similar collections are found, belonging to various other schools of Vedic study, and they
bear the common name of Brāhmaṇa, with the name of the
school, or some other distinctive title, prefixed. Thus, the
Aitareya and Kāuṣītaki-Brāhmaṇas, belonging to the schools
of the Rig-Veda, the Pañcaviṃśa and ṣaḍviṃśa-Brāhmaṇas
and other minor works, to the Sāma-Veda; the GopathaBrāhmaṇa, to the Atharva-Veda; and a Jāiminīya- or Tala¬
vakāra-Brāhmaṇa, to the Sāma-Veda, has recently (Burnell)
been discovered in India; the Tāittirīya-Brāhmaṇa is a collection of mingled mantra and brāhmaṇa, like the saṁhitā
of the same name, but supplementary and later. These
works are likewise regarded as canonical by the schools,
and are learned by their sectaries with the same extreme care
which is devoted to the saṁhitās, and their condition of
textual preservation is of a kindred excellence. To a certain extent, there is among them the possession of common
material: a fact the bearings of which are not yet fully
understood.
Notwithstanding the inanity of no small part of their
contents, the Brāhmaṇas are of a high order of interest in
their bearings on the history of Indian institutions; and
philologically they are not less important, since they represent a form of language in most respects intermediate
between the classical and that of the Vedas, and offer specimens on a large scale of a prose style, and of one which
is in the main a natural and freely developed one — the
oldest and most primitive Indo-European prose.
Beside the Brāhmaṇas are sometimes found later appendices, of a similar character, called Äraṇyakas {forestsections): as the Āitareya-Äraṇyaka ‚ Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka,
Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka, and so on. And from some of these, or
even from the Brāhmaṇas, are extracted the earliest Upa¬
nisads [sittings, lectures on sacred subjects) — which,
INTRODUCTION. xix
b*
however, are continued and added to down to a comparatively modern time. The Upaniṣads are one of the lines
by which the Brāhmaṇa literature passes over into the later
theological literature.
Another line of transition is shown in the Sūtras (lines,
rules). The works thus named are analogous with the
Brāhmaṇas in that they belong to the schools of Vedic
study and are named from them, and that they deal with
the religious ceremonies: treating them, however, in the
way of prescription, not of dogmatic explanation. They,
too, contain some mantra or hymn-material, not found to
occur elsewhere. In part (śrāuta or kalpa-sūtras), they take
up the great sacrificial ceremonies, with which the Brāh¬
maṇas have to do; in part (gṛhya-sūtras), they teach the
minor duties of a pious householder; in some cases (sā¬
mayācārika-sūtras) they lay down the general obligations of
one whose life is in accordance with prescribed duty. And
out of the last two, or especially the last, come by natural
development the law-books (dharma-śāstras), which make
a conspicuous figure in the later literature: the oldest and
most noted of them being that called by the name of
Manu (an outgrowth, it is believed by many, of the Mānava
Vedic school); to which are added that of Yājnavalkya, and
many others.
Respecting the chronology of this development, or the
date of any class of writings, still more of any individual
work, the less that is said the better. All dates given in
Indian literary history are pins set up to be bowled down
again. Every important work has undergone so many more
or less transforming changes before reaching the form in
which it comes to us, that the question of original construction is complicated with that of final redaction. It is
so with the law-book of Manu, just mentioned, which has
well-founded claims to being regarded as one of the very
oldest works of the proper Sanskrit literature, if not the
oldest (it has been variously assigned, to periods from six
centuries before Christ to four after Christ). It is so, again?
in a still more striking degree, with the great legendary
xx INTRODUCTION.
epic of the Mahābhārata. The ground-work of this is
doubtless of very early date; but it has served as a text
into which materials of various character and period have
been inwoven, until it has become a heterogeneous mass,
a kind of cyclopedia for the warrior-caste, hard to separate
into its constituent parts. The story of Nala, and the philosophical poem Bhagavad-Gītā, are two of the most noted
of its episodes. The Rāmāyaṇa, the other most famous epic,
is a work of another kind: though also worked over and
more or less altered in its transmission to our time, it is
the production, in the main, of a single author (Vālmīki);
and it is generally believed to be in part allegorical, representing the introduction of Aryan culture and dominion
into Southern India. By its side stand a number of minor
epics, of various authorship and period, as the Raghuvaṃśa
(ascribed to the dramatist Kālidāsa), the Māghakāvya, the
Bhaṭṭikāvya (the last, written chiefly with the grammatical
intent of illustrating by use as many as possible of the
numerous formations which, through taught by the grammarians, find no place in the literature).
The Purāṇas, a large class of works mostly of immense
extent, are best mentioned in connection with the epics.
They are pseudo-historical and prophetic in character, of
modern date, and of inferior value. Real history finds no
place in Sanskrit literature, nor is there any conscious
historical element in any of the works composing it.
Lyric poetry is represented by many works, some of
which, as the Meghadūta and Gītagovinda, are of no mean
order of merit.
The drama is a still more noteworthy and important
branch. The first indications of dramatical inclination and
capacity on the part of the Hindus are seen in certain
hymns of the Veda, where a mythological or legendary
situation is conceived dramatically, and set forth in the
form of a dialogue — well-known examples are the dialogue
of Saramā and the Paṇis, that of Yama and his sister Yamī,
that of Vasiṣṭha and the rivers, that of Agni and the other
gods — but there are no extant intermediaries between these
INTRODUCTION. xxi
and the standard drama. The beginnings of the latter date
from a period when in actual life the higher and educated
characters used Sanskrit, and the lower and uneducated used
the popular dialects derived from it, the Prakrits; and their
dialogue reflects this condition of things. Then, however,
learning (not to call it pedantry) intervened, and sterotyped
the new element; a Prakrit grammar grew up beside the
Sanskrit grammar, according to the rules of which Prakrit
could be made indefinitely on a substrate of Sanskrit; and
none of the existing dramas need to date from the time of
vernacular use of Prakrit, while most or all of them are
undoubtedly much later. Among the dramatic authors,
Kālidāsa is incomparably the chief, and his Śakuntalā as
distinctly his masterpiece. His date has been a matter of
much inquiry and controversy; it is doubtless some centuries later than our era. The only other work deserving
to be mentioned along with Kālidāsa's is the Mṛcchakaṭī of
Śūdraka, also of questionable period, but believed to be
the oldest of the extant dramas.
A partly dramatic character belongs also to the fable,
in which animals are represented as acting and speaking.
The most noted works in this department are the Pañca¬
tantra, which through Persian and Semitic versions has made
its way all over the world, and contributes a considerable
quota to the fable-literature of every European language,
and, partly founded on it, the comparatively recent and
popular Hitopadeśa [salutary instruction).
Two of the leading departments of Sanskrit scientific
literature, the legal and the grammatical, have been already
sufficiently noticed; of those remaining, the most important
by far is the philosophical. The beginnings of philosophical speculation are seen already in some of the later hymns
of the Veda, more abundantly in the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇ¬
yakas, and then especially in the Upaniṣads. The evolution and historic relation of the systems of philosophy,
and the age of their text-books, are matters on which much
obscurity still rests. There are six systems of primary rank,
and reckoned as orthodox, although really standing in no
xxii INTRODUCTION.
accordance with approved religious doctrines. All of them
seek the same end, the emancipation of the soul from the
necessity of continuing its existence in a succession of
bodies, and its unification with the All-soul; but they
differ in regard to the means by which they seek to attain
this end.
The astronomical science of the Hindus is a reflection
of that of Greece, and its literature is of recent date; but
as mathematicians, in arithmetic and geometry, they have
shown more independence. Their medical science, although
its beginnings go back even to the Veda, in the use of
medicinal plants with accompanying incantations, is of little
account, and its proper literature by no means ancient.
CONTENTS .
Chap. Page.
PREFAC E v
INTRODUCTIO N xi
I. ALPHABE T 1—9
I I . SYSTE M OF SOUNDS ; PRONUNCIATIO N . . . 10—3 4
Vowels, 10 ; Consonants, 1 3 ; Quantity, 2 7 ; Accent, 28.
III. RULE S OF EUPHONI C COMBINATIO N ... . 34—8 7
Introductory, 3 4 ; Principles, 3 7 ; Rules of Vowel Combination, 4 2 ; Permitted Finals, 49 ; Deaspiration, 53 ;
Surd and Sonant Assimilation, 5 4 ; Combinations of
Final s and r, 5 6 ; Conversion of s to ṣ, 6 1 ; Conversion of n to ṇ, 64; Conversion of Dental Mutes to
Linguáls and Palatals, 6 6 ; Combinations of Final n,
69 ; Combinations of Final m, 7 1 ; the Palatal Mutes
and Sibilant, and h, 7 2 ; the Lingual Sibilant, 7 7 ;
Extension and Abbreviation, 78 ; Strengthening and
Weakening Processes, 8 1 ; Guṇa and Vṛddhi, 8 1 ;
Vowel-lengthening, 84 ; Vowel-lightening, 8 5 ; Nasal
Increment, 8 6 ; Reduplication, 87.
I V . DECLENSIO N 88—11 0
Gender, Number, Case, 8 8 ; Uses of the Cases, 8 9 ;
Endings of declension, 103 ; Variation of Stem, 107;
Accent in Declension, 108.
V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVE S Ill—17 6
Classification etc., Ill ; Declension I., Stems in a, 112 ;
Declension II., Stems in i and u, 116; Declension
III., Stems in Long Vowels (ā, ī, ū): A. Root-words
etc., 124; Stems in Diphthongs, 130 ; B.Derivative
Stems etc., 131; Declension IV., Stems in ṛ or ar,
137; Declension V., Stems in Consonants, 141 ;
A. Root-stems etc., 143; B. Derivative Stems in as,
is, us, 153; 0. Derivative Stems in an, 156; D.
in in, 161; E. in ant or at, 163 ; F. Perfect Participles in vans, 169 ; G. Comparatives in yāṃs or
yas, 172; Comparison, 173.
Ì
xxiv CONTENTS.
Chap. Page.
V I . NUMERALS 177—185
Cardinals, 177; Ordinals etc., 183.
VII . PRONOUNS . . 185—199
Personal, 185; Demonstrative, 188; Interrogative,
194; Relative, 195; other Pronouns: Emphatic, Indefinite, 196; Nouns used pronominally, 197;
Pronominal Derivatives, Possessives etc., 197; Adjectives declined pronominally, 199.
VIII . CONJUGATION 200—226
Voice, Tense, Mode, Number, Person, 200; Verbal
Adjectives and Nouns, 203; Secondary Conjugations,
203; Personal Endings, 204; Subjunctive Mode, 209;
Optative, 211; Imperative, 213; Uses of the Modes,
215; Participles, 220; Augment, 220; Reduplication,
222; Accent of the Verb, 223.
I X . T H E PRESENT-SYSTEM 227—278
General, 227 ; Conjugations and Conjugation Classes,
228; Root-Class (second or ad-class), 231; Reduplicating Class (third or hu-class), 242; Nasal
Class (seventh or rudh-class), 250; n u and u-Classes
(fifth and eighth, or su- and tan-classes), 254; nā -
Class (ninth or krī-class), 260; a-Class (first or
bhū-class), 264; Accented á-Class (sixth or tudclass), 269; ya-Class (fourth or div-class), 271;
Accented yá-Class or Passive Conjugation, 275;
So-called tenth or cur-class, 277; Uses of the Present and Imperfect, 278.
X . T H E PERFECT-SYSTEM 279—296
Perfect Tense, 279; Perfect Participle, 291; Modes
of the Perfect, 292; Pluperfect, 295; Uses of the
Perfect, 295.
X I . T H E AORIST-SYSTEMS 297—330
Classification, 297; I. Simple Aorist: I. Root-Aorist,
299; Passive Aorist 3d sing., 304; 2. the a-Aorist,
305 ; II. 3. Reduplicated Aorist, 308; III. Sibilant
Aorist, 313; 4. the s-Aorist, 314; 5. the iṣ-Aorist,
320; 6. the siṣ-Aorist, 323; 7. the sa-Aorist, 325;
Precative, 326; Uses of the Aorist, 328.
XII . T H E FUTURE-SYSTEMS 330—339
I. The s-Future, 331; Preterit of the s-Future, Conditional, 334; II. The Periphrastic Future, 335;
Uses of the Futures and Conditional, 337.
CONTENTS . xxv
Chap. Page.
XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS : PARTICI -
PLES , INFINITIVES , GERUND S 340—36 0
Passive Participle in tá or ná, 340 ; Past Active
Participle in tavant, 344 ; Future Passive Participles, Gerundives, 345 ; Infinitives, 347 ; Uses of
the Infinitives, 351 ; Gerunds, 355; Adverbial Gerund
in am, 359.
XIV . DERIVATIV E OR SECONDAR Y CONJUGATIO N . 360—39 1
I. Passive, 361 ; II. Intensive, 362 ; Present-System,
365; Perfect, Aorist, Future, etc., 370; III. Desider¬
ative, 372; Present-System, 374; Perfect, Aorist,
Future, etc., 376; IV. Causative, 378; Present-System,
380 ; Perfect, Aorist, Future, etc., 383 ; V. Denominative, 386.
X V . PERIPHRASTI C A N D COMPOUN D CONJUGATIO N 391—40 3
The Periphrastic Perfect, 392; Participial Periphrastic Phrases, 394; Composition with Prepositional
Prefixes, 395 ; Other Verbal Compounds, 400.
XVI . INDECLINABLE S 403—41 7
Adverbs, 403 ; Prepositions, 414; Conjunctions, 416 ;
Interjections, 417.
XVII . DERIVATIO N OF DECLINABL E STEM S ... . 418—48 0
A. Primary Derivatives, 420; B. Secondary Derivatives, 454.
XVIII . FORMATIO N OF COMPOUN D STEM S 480—51 5
Classification, 480 ; I. Copulative Compounds, 485 ;
II. Determinative Compounds, 489 ; A. Dependent
Compounds, 489 ; B. Descriptive Compounds, 494 ;
III. Secondary Adjective Compounds, 501; A. Possessive Compounds, 501 ; B. Compound with Governed
Final Member, 511 ; Adjective Compounds as Nouns
and as Adverbs, 512 ; Anomalous Compounds 514 ;
Stem-finals altered in Composition, 514; Loose
Construction with Compounds, 515.
APPENDI X 516—52 0
A. Examples of Various Sanskrit Type, 516; B. Example of Accentuated Text, 518 ; Synopsis of the
conjugation of roots bhū and kṛ, 520.
SANSKRI T INDE X 521—53 9
GENERA L INDE X 540—55 1
ABBREVIATIONS .
AA. Āitareya-Āraṇyaka.
AB. Āitareya-Brāhmaṇa.
AŚS. Āśvalāyana-Śrāuta-Sūtra.
AGS. Āśvalāyana-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
Āpast. Āpastamba-Sūtra.
APr. Atharva-Prātiśākhya.
AV. Atharva-Veda.
B. or Br. Brāhmaṇas.
BAU. Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka-Upaniṣad.
BhG. Bhagavad-Gītā.
BhP. Bhāgavata-Purāṇa.
BR. Böhtlingk and Roth (Petersburg Lexicon).
C. Classical Sanskrit.
Ś. Śakuntalā.
Śatr. Śatruṁjaya-Māhātmyam.
ŚB. Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
ŚŚS. Śāṅkhāyana-Śrāuta-Sūtra.
ŚGS. Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
ChU. Chāndogya-Upaniṣad.
ŚvU. Śvetāśvatara-Upaniṣad.
DKC. Daśa-Kumāra-Carita.
E. Epos (MBh. and R.).
GB. Gopatha-Brāhmaṇa.
GGS. Gobhilīya-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
H. Hitopadeśa.
Har. Harivaṃśa.
JB. Jāiminīya (or Talavakāra) Brāh¬
maṇa.
JUB. Jāiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa.
K. Kāṭhaka.
Kap. Kapiṣṭhala-Saṁhitā.
KB. Kāuṣītaki- (or Śāṅkhāyana-)
Brāhmaṇa.
KBU. Kāuṣītaki-Brāhmaṇa-Upaniṣad.
KŚS. Kātyāyana-Śrāuta-Sūtra.
KS. Kāuśika-Sūtra.
KSS. Kathā-Sarit-Sāgara.
KṭhU. Kaṭha-Upanisad.
K U. Kena-Upaniṣad.
LŚS. Lāṭyāyana-Śrāuta-Sūtra.
M. Manu.
MāiU. Māitrī-Upaniṣad.
MBh. Mahābhārata.
MḍU. Muṇḍaka-Upaniṣad.
Megh. Meghadūta.
MS. Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā.
Nāiṣ. Nāiṣadhīya.
Nir. Nirukta.
Pañc. Pañcatantra.
PB. Pañcaviṃśa- (or Tāṇḍya-) Brāh¬
maṇa.
PGS. Pāraskara-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
PU. Praśna Upaniṣad.
R. Rāmāyaṇa.
Ragh. Raghuvaṃśa.
RPr. Rigveda-Prātiśākhya.
RT. Rāja-Taraṅginī.
RV. Rig-Veda.
S. Sūtras.
ṢB. Ṣaḍviṃśa-Brāhmaṇa.
Spr. Indische Sprüche (Böhtlingk).
SV. Sāma-Veda.
TA. Tāittirīya-Araṇyaka.
TB. Tāittirīya-Brāhmaṇa.
TPr. Tāittirīya-Prātiśākhya.
Tribh. Tribhāṣyaratna (comm. to
TPr.).
TS. Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā.
U. Upaniṣads.
V. Vedas(RV., AV., SV.).
Vas. Vasiṣṭha.
VBS. Varāha-Bṛhat-Saṁhitā.
Vet. Vetālapancaviṃśatī.
Vikr. Vikramorvaśī.
VPr. Vājasaneyi-Prātiśākhya.
VS. Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā.
VS. Kāṇ. do. Kāṇva-text.
Y. Yājñavalkya.
CHAPTE R I.
ALPHABET.
1. T H E natives of India write their ancient and sacred
language in a variety of alphabets — generally, in each
part of the country, in the same alphabet which they use
for their own vernacular. The mode of writing, however,
which is employed throughout the heart of Aryan India, or
in Hindustan proper, is alone adopted by European scholars.
it is called the devanāgarī.
a. This name is of doubtful origin and value. A more comprehensive
name is nāgarī (perhaps, of the city); and deva-nāgarī is nāgarī of
the gods, or of the Brahmans.
2. Much that relates to the history of the Indian alphabets is still
obscure. The earliest written monuments of known date in the country are
the inscriptions containing the edicts of Aśoka or Piyadasi, of about the
middle of the third century B. C. They are in two different systems of
characters, of which one shows distinct signs of derivation from a Semitic
source, while the other is also probably, though much less evidently, of the
same origin. From the latter, the Laṭh, or Southern Aśoka character (of
Girnar), come the later Indian alphabets, both those of the northern Aryan
languages and those of the southern Dravidian languages. The nāgarī,
devanāgarī, Bengali, Guzerātī, and others, are varieties of its northern
derivatives; and with them are related some of the alphabets of peoples
outside of India — as in Tibet and Farther India — who have adopted Hindu
culture or religion.
a. There is reason to believe that writing was first employed in India
for practical purposes — for correspondence and business and the like —
and only by degrees came to be applied also to literary use. The literature,
to a great extent, and the more fully in proportion to its claimed sanctity
and authority, ignores all written record, and assumes to be kept in existence by oral tradition alone.
3-] I. ALPHABET . 2
3. Of the devanāgarī itself there are minor varieties, depending on
differences of locality or of period, as also of individual hand (see examples
in Weber's catalogue of the Berlin Sanskrit MSS,, in Rājendralāla Mitra's
notices of MSS. in Indian libraries, in the published fac-similes of inscriptions, and so on); and these are in some measure reflected in the type
prepared for printing, both in India and in Europe. But a student who
makes himself familiar with one style of printed characters will have little
difficulty with the others, and will soon learn, by practice, to read the manuscripts. A few specimens of types other than those used in this work are
given in Appendix A.
a. On account of the difficulty of combining them with the smaller sizes
of our Roman and Italic type, the devanāgarī characters are used below only
in connection with the first or largest size. And, in accordance with the
laudable usage of recent grammars, they are, wherever given, also transliterated, in Clarendon letters; while the latter alone are used in the other
sizes.
4. The student may be advised to try to familiarize himself
from the start with the devanāgarī mode of writing. At the same
time, it is not indispensable that he should do so until, having
learned the principal paradigms, he comes to begin reading and analysing and parsing; and many will find the latter the more practical,
and in the end equally or more effective, way.
5. The characters of the devanāgarī alphabet, and the
European letters which will be used in transliterating them,
are as follows:
short long
i ^ a a -5TT ā
\ r
palatal
3
§ i
4
3 ī
Vowels: simple { labial » 3 u <* "37 ū
lingual
7
ṛ
8
-fj ṝ
dental 9 ~f 1 [w “ ḹ]
diphthongs <
I labial
í palatal n "7 e 12 77 AI
3ETT o 14 3EÍT āu
Visarga 15 : ḥ
Anusvāra 1
6
--, « ṃ or ṁ (see 73c).
surd surd asp. sonant son. asp. nasal
guttural 17 ^ k is ī~í kh 19 JT g % gh 3" &
Palatal 22 r‡ C 23 — Ch 24 j
2 5
~* jh 26 3—f ñ
lingual 27 Z t 23 — th 29 3 ḍ so rs ḍh 31 uj n
dental 32 <-f t 33 th ™^ d 35 "T dh *» n
labial 37 q p 3s q" ph 39 ~ b 40 v\ bh « tfm
Mutes
3 THEOR Y OF THIS MOD E OF WRITING . [- 9
Sibilants
Semivowels
Í
palatal
lingual
dental
* labial
I
palatal
lingual
dental
4 2 ET y
43 "T r
-- ~f 1
45 of V
48 Ś
47 ~ S
48 H S
Aspiration 49 ~T h
a. To these may be added a lingual 1 which in some of the
Vedic texts takes the place of 3 ḍ when occurring between two
vowels (54).
6. A few other sounds, recognized by the theories of the Hindu
grammarians, but either having no separate characters to represent
them or only very rarely and exceptionally written, will be noticed
below (71 b, c, 230). Such are the guttural and labial breathings, the
nasal semivowels, and others.
7. The order of arrangement given above is that in
which the sounds are catalogued and described by the native
grammarians; and it has been adopted by European scholars
as the alphabetic order, for indexes, dictionaries, etc.: to the
Hindus, the idea of an alphabetic arrangement for such
practical uses is wanting.
a. In some works (as the Petersburg lexicon), a visarga which is regarded as equivalent to and exchangeable with a sibilant (172) is, though
written as visarga, given the alphabetic place of the sibilant.
8. The theory of the devanāgarī, as of the other Indian modes of writing, is syllabic and consonantal. That
is to say, it regards as the written unit, not the simple
sound, but the syllable (akṣara); and further, as the substantial part of the syllable, the consonant or the consonants
which precede the vowel — this latter being merely implied,
or, if written, being written by a subordinate sign attached
to the consonant.
9. Hence follow these two principles:
A. The forms of the vowel - characters given in the
alphabetical scheme above are used only when the vowel
9-j
I. ALPHABET . 4
forms a syllable by itself, or is not combined with a preceding consonant: that is, when it is either initial or preceded by another vowel. In combination with a consonant,
other modes of representation are used.
B. If more consonants than one precede the vowel,
forming with it a single syllable, their characters must be
combined into a single compound character.
a. Native Hindu usage, in manuscripts and inscriptions, treats
the whole material of a sentence alike, not separating its words from
one another, any more than the syllables of the same word: a final
consonant is combined into one written syllable with the initial vowel
or consonant or consonants of the following word. It never occurred
to the Hindus to space their words in any way, even where the mode
of writing admitted such treatment; nor to begin a paragraph on a
new line; nor to write one line of verse under another: everything,
without exception, is written solid by them, filling the whole page.
b. Thus, the sentence and verse-line ahaṁ rudrebhir vasubhiś
carāmy aham ādityāir uta viśvadevāiḥ (Rig-Veda X. 125. 1: see
Appendix B) I wander with the Vasus, the Rudras, I with the Ādityas
and the All-Gods is thus syllabized: a haṁ ru dre bhi rva su bhi śca
rā mya ha mā di tyāi ru ta v i śva de vāiḥ, each syllable ending
with a vowel (or a vowel modified by the nasal-sign anusvāra, or
having the sign of a final breathing, visarga, added: these being the
only elements that can follow a vowel in the same syllable); and it
is (together with the next line) written in the manuscripts after this
fashion:
-3^^mīīT H kl( I ^Ji ^ HI í^cìī
f s w –feīĪK I Jt""īīftl^H T II
Each syllable is written separately, and by many scribes the
successive syllables are parted a little from one another: thus,
and so on.
c. In Western practice, however, it is almost universally customary to divide paragraphs, to make the lines of verse follow one another, and also to separate the words so far as this can be done
without changing the mode of writing them. See Appendix B, where
the verse here given is so treated.
d. Further, in works prepared for beginners in the language, it
is not uncommon to make a more complete separation of words by a
5 WRITIN G OF VOWELS . [—10
free use of the virāma-sign (11) under final consonants: thus, for
example,
or even by indicating also the combinations of initial andfinalvowels
(126, 127): for example,
e. In transliterating. Western methods of separation of words are
of course to be followed; to do otherwise would be simple pedantry.
10. Under A‚ it is to be noticed that the modes of
indicating a vowel combined with a preceding consonant
are as follows:
a. The short -Sf a has no written sign at all; the consonant-sign itself implies a following ET a, unless some other
vowel-sign is attached to it (or else the virama: 11). Thus,
the consonant-signs as given above in the alphabetic scheme
are really the signs of the syllables ka, kha, etc. etc. (to ha).
b. The long ā is written by a perpendicular stroke
after the consonant: thus, -"f kā, dhā, "Tf hā.
c Short ^ i and long ^ ī are written by a similar
stroke, which for short i is placed before the consonant and for
long ī is placed after it, and in either case is connected with
the consonant by a hook above the upper line: thus, W\ ki,
^ kī ; f?T bhi, >ft bhī; ni, -fj" nī.
The hook above, turning to the left or to the right, is historically the
essential part of the character, having been originally the whole of it; the
hooks were only later prolonged, so as to reach all the way down beside
the consonant. In the MSS., they almost never have the horizontal stroke
drawn across them above, though this is added in the printed characters :
thus, originally % ki, ^ kī; in the MSS., f--f", ; in print, f^T, -fitd. The u-sounds, short and long, are written by hooks
attached to the lower end of the consonant-sign: thus, ~
ku, ^ kū; J ḍu, 3 ḍū. On account of the necessities of
combination, du and du are somewhat disguised: thus, 3f,
and the forms with ‡ r and
—
h are still more irregular : thus, ~ ru, 5 rū; ~T hu, "gT hū.
10-] I. ALPHABET . 6
e. The ṛ-vowels, short and long, are written by a subjoined hook, single or double, opening toward the right:
thus, ~ kṛ,
—
kṛ; Ś dṛ, ^ dṛ. In the h-sign, the hooks
are usually attached to the middle: thus, hṛ, ~ hr.
As to the combination of ṛ with preceding r, see below, 14d.
f. The ḷ-vowel is written with a reduced form of its
full initial character: thus, ~' kḷ; the corresponding long
has no real occurrence (23a), but would be written with a
similar reduced sign.
g. The diphthongs are written by strokes, single or
double, above the upper line, combined, for ETT O and OR
au, with the ā-sign after the consonant: thus, % ke, %
kāi; sJ7f ko, sftf kāu.
h. In some devanāgarī manuscripts (as in the Bengali alphabet), the
single stroke above, or one of the double ones, is replaced by a sign like the
ā - sign before the consonant: thus, J3iï ke, kāi; f-ffi ko, f-ffl kāu.
11. A consonant-sign, however, is capable of being
made to signify the consonant-sound alone, without an added
vowel, by having written beneath it a stroke called the
virāma (rest,stop) : thus, ~^ k, <[" d, ^ h.
a. Since, as was pointed out above, the Hindus write the words of a
sentence continuously like one word (9a, b), the virāma is in general called
for only when a final consonant occurs before a pause. But it is also occasionally resorted to by scribes, or in print, in order to avoid an awkward
or difficult combination of consonant-signs: thus,
f^lpj: liḍbhiḥ, f^Zīī liṭsu, ET3T-T ankṣva;
and it is used to make a separation of words in texts prepared for beginners (9d).
12. Under B, it is to be noticed that the consonant
combinations are for the most part not at all difficult to
make or to recognise for one who is familiar with the
simple signs. The characteristic part of a consonant-sign
that is to be added to another is taken (to the exclusion of
the horizontal or of the perpendicular framing-line, or of
both), and they are put together according to convenience,
7 COMBINATIONS OF CONSONANTS. [—14
either side by side, or one above the other; in a few combinations either arrangement is allowed. The consonant that
is to be pronounced first is set before the other in the one
order, and above it in the other order.
a. Examples of the side-by-side arrangement are: TS\
gga, 5~ jja, cqf pya, -~f nma, r~T ttha, *Tf bhya, F~ ska,
OUT ṣṇa, f~ tka.
b. Examples of the above-and-below arrangement are:
^ kka, K7 kva, ~ cca, "f ñja, —
dda, H Pta, ~ tna,
~f tva.
13. In some cases, however, there is more or less abbreviation or disguise of the independent form of a consonant-sign in combination. Thus,
a. Of ~ k in ~ T kta, kla; and in ^TR kṇa etc.;
b. Of <T t in īī tta;
c Of ‡ d in ~ dga, dna, etc;
d. Of m and TJ y, when following other consonants:
thus,
—
T kya, kma, ~f ṅma, 21 ṅya, dma, "-īī dya, ~[
hma, ~f hya, ~* chya, ^ ḍhya.
e. Of ś, which generally becomes ST when followed
by a consonant: thus, 31 śca, W śna, IT śva, 5-IT Śya. The
same change is usual when a vowel-sign is added below:
thus, 5 śu, -~T śṛ.
f. Other combinations, of not quite obvious value, are
—
ṇṇa, "T 11a, “ ddha, "“ dbha,
—
ṣṭa, "5" ṣṭha; and the
compounds of ~r h : as hṇa, ]~ hna.
g. In a case or two, no trace of the constituent letters
is recognizable : thus, ~ kṣa,
—
jña.
14. The semivowel r, in making combinations with
other consonants, is treated in a wholly peculiar manner,
analogous with that in which the vowels are treated.
a. If pronounced before another consonant or combination of consonants, it is written above the latter, with a
14—]
I. ALPHABET . 8
hook opening to the right (much like the sign of the vowel
r, as written under a consonant: 10e) : thus, ôfí rka, rṣa,
rtva, rrj rmya, rtsna.
b. Then, if a consonant-group thus containing r as
first member is followed by a vowel that has its sign, or a
part of its sign, or its sign of nasality (anusvāra: 70, 71),
written above the line, the r-sign is placed furthest to the
right: thus, Sfí rke, 5fí rkaṃ, fsft rki, off rkī, ifff rko, 5fif
rkīṃ, rkoṃ.
c. If r is pronounced after another consonant, whether
before a vowel or before yet another consonant, it is written
with a straight stroke below, slanting to the left: thus.
*5T pra, 51 dhra, ī\ gra, & sra, "g" ddhra, ^ ntra, ZTJ grya,
R srva, ~T ntrya ; and, with modifications of a preceding
consonant-sign like those noted above (13), ~" tra, ?T dra,
~ śra, <~' hra.
d. When ‡ r is to be combined with a following ft ṛ,
it is the vowel which is written in full, with its initial
character, and the consonant in subordination to it: thus,
ft -~-
15. Further combinations, of three, or four, or even
five consonant-signs, are made according to the same rules.
Examples are:
of three consonants, W ttva, U ddhya, dvya,
drya, 17J dhrya, psva, g~ ścya, ~f ṣṭhya, ~f hvya;
of four consonants, ^fà ktrya, 2pT ṅkṣya, ~J ṣṭrya,
c~~T tsmya;
of five consonants, f—j rtsnya.
a. The manuscripts, and the type-fonts as well, differ from one another
more in their management of consonant combinations than in any other respect, often having peculiarities which one needs a little practice to understand. It is quite useless to give in a grammar the whole series of possible
combinations (some of them excessively rare) which are provided for in any
given type-font, or even in all. There is nothing which due familiarity
9 VARIOU S SIGNS. [-18
with the simple signs and with the above rules of combination will not
enable the student readily to analyse and explain.
16. a. A sign called the avagraha (separator) — namely
— is occasionally used in the manuscripts, sometimes in
the manner of a hyphen, sometimes as a mark of hiatus,
sometimes to mark the elision of initial 5\ a after final ~ e
or o (135). In printed texts, especially European, itis
ordinarily applied to the use last mentioned, and to that
alone: thus, ^ te ‘bruvan, vT"=f†rT
8 0
'bravīt, for te
abruvan, so abravīt.
b. If the elided initial-vowel is nasal, and has the anu¬
svāra-sign (70, 71) written above, this is usually and more
properly transferred to the eliding vowel; but sometimes it
is written instead over the avagraha-sign: thus, for so 'ṃśu¬
mān, from so aṃśumān, either H† CTīīH or FIT á-WFTc. The sign
0
is used in place of something that is
omitted, and to be understood from the connection : thus,
^(H'SHciH^°c"j^ °?Fr vīrasenasutas -tam -tena.
d. Signs of punctuation are I and n.
At the end of a verse, a paragraph, or the like, the latter of
them is ordinarily written twice, with the figure of enumeration between : thus, II í}0 U.
17. The numeral figures are
<( 1, ^ 2, 5 3, g 4, H 5, ^ 6, b 7, Z 8, Ś 9, 0 0.
In combination, to express larger numbers, they are
used in precisely the same way as European digits: thus,
25, ^ 0 630,toOOO7000, ^t\>0 1894.
18. The Hindu grammarians call the different sounds, and the
characters representing them, by a kāra (maker) added to the sound
of the letter, if a vowel, or to the letter followed by a, if a consonant. Thus, the sound or character a is called akāra; k is kakāra;
and so on. But the kāra is also omitted, and a, ka, etc. are used
alone. The r, however, is not called rakāra, but only ra, or repha
snarl: the sole example of a specific name for an alphabetic element
of its class. The anusvāra and visarga are also known by these
names alone.
19—] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 10
CHAPTE R I I .
SYSTEM OF SOUNDS; PRONUNCIATION.
I. Vowels.
19. T H E a, i, and u-vowels. The Sanskrit has these
three earliest and most universal vowels of Indo-European
language, in both short and long form — -Sf a and ~~f a,
^ i and ^ ī, 3 u and ~T ū. They are to be pronounced in
the "Continental" or "Italian" manner — as in far or farther,
pin and pique, pull and rule.
20. The a is the openest vowel, an utterance from the expanded throat, stands in no relation of kindred with any of the
classes of consonantal sounds, and has no corresponding semivowel.
Of the close vowels i and u, on the other hand, i is palatal, and
shades through its semivowel y into the palatal and guttural consonantclasses ; u is similarly related, through its semivowel v, to the labial
class, as involving in its utterance a narrowing and rounding of
the lips.
a. The Paninean scheme (commentary to Pānini's grammar i. 1. 9) classes
a as guttural, but apparently only in order to give that series as well as the
rest a vowel; no one of the Prātiśākhyas puts a into one class with k etc.
A ll these authorities concur in calling the i - and u-vowels respectively palatal
and labial.
21. The short a is not pronounced in India with the full openness
of ā, as its corresponding short, but usually as the "neutral vowel"
(English so-called "short w", of bwt, sow, blood, etc.). This peculiarity
appears very early, being acknowledged by Pāṇini and by two of the
Prātiśākhyas (APr. i . 36; VPr. i . 72), which call the utterance
saṁvṛta, covered up, dimmed. It is wont to be ignored by Western
scholars, except those who have studied in India.
22. The a-vowels are the prevailing vowel-sounds of the language, being about twice as frequent as all the others (including
diphthongs) taken together. The i-vowels, again, are about twice as
numerous as the u-vowels. And, in each pair, the short vowel is
more than twice (2-/2 to 3 times) as common as the long.
a. For more precise estimates of frequency, of these and of the other
11 VOWELS. [—27
alphabetic elements, and for the way in which they were obtained, see
below, 75.
23. The ṛ- and 1-vowels. To the three simple vowels already mentioned the Sanskrit adds two others, the
ṛ-vowel and the ḷ-vowel, plainly generated by the abbreviation of syllables containing respectively a ^ r or ^ 1
along with another vowel: the -f? ṛ coming almost always
(see 237, 241-3) from ar or i[ ra, the \ from al.
a. Some of the Hindu grammarians add to the alphabet also a long 1;
but this is only for the sake of an artificial symmetry, since the sound does
not occur in a single genuine word in the language.
24. The vowel ft ṛ is simply a smooth or untrilled
r-sound, assuming a vocalic office in syllable-making —
as, by a like abbreviation, it has done also in certain Slavonic languages. The vowel 1 is an l-sound similarly
uttered — like the English l-vowel in such words as able,
angle, addle.
a. The modern Hindus pronounce these vowels as ri, rī, U (or
even Iri), having long lost the habit and the facility of giving a
vowel value to the pure r- and /-sounds. Their example is widely
followed by European scholars; and hence also the (distorting and
altogether objectionable) transliterations ṛi, ṛī, Ii. There is no real
difficulty in the way of acquiring and practising the true utterance.
b. Some of the grammarians (see APr. i . 37, note) attempt to define more
nearly the way in which, in these vowels, a real r- or l-element is combined
with something else.
25. Like their corresponding semivowels, r and 1, these vowels
belong respectively in the general lingual and dental classes; the
euphonic influence of ṛ and ṛ (189) shows this clearly. They are
so ranked in the Paninean scheme; but the Prātiśākhyas in general
strangely class them with the jihvāmūlīya sounds, our "gutturals"
(39).
26. The short ṛ is found in every variety of word and of position, and is not rare, being just about as frequent as long ū. Long
ṛ́ is very much more unusual, occurring only in certain plural cases
of noun-stems in ṛ (371b‚d‚ 375). The 1 is met with only in some
of the forms and derivatives of a single not very common verbal
root (kip).
27. The diphthongs. Of the four diphthongs, two,
the " e and ~T o, are in great part original Indo-European
27— II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 1 2
sounds. In the Sanskrit, they wear the aspect of being
products of the increment or strengthening of ^ i and 3 u
respectively; and they are called the corresponding guṇavowels to the latter (see below, 235 ff). The other two, ^ ai
and au, are held to be of peculiar Sanskrit growth; they
are also in general results of another and higher increment
of ^ i and 3 u, to which they are called the corresponding
vṛddhi-vowels (below, 235 ff). But all are likewise sometimes generated by euphonic combination (127); and 3BfT o,
especially, is common as result of the alteration of a final
-TO^as (175).
28. The " e and %R o are, both in India and in Europe, usually pronounced as they are transliterated — that
is, as long e- (English "long a", or e in they) and o-sounds,
without diphthongal character.
a. Such they apparently already were to the authors of the
Prātiśākhyas, which, while ranking them as diphthongs (sandhyaksara),
give rules respecting their pronunciation in a manner implying them
to be virtually unitary sounds. But their euphonic treatment (131-4)
clearly shows them to have been still at the period when the euphonic
laws established themselves, as they of course were at their origin,
real diphthongs, ai [a + i) and au (a + u). From them, on the
same evidence, the heavier or vṛddhi diphthongs were distinguished
by the length of their a-element, as āi (3 + i) and āu (ā + u).
b. The recognizable distinctness of the two elements in the vṛddhidiphthongs is noticed by the Prātiśākhyas (see APr. i . 40, note); but the relation of those elements is either defined as equal, or the a is made of less quantity than the i and w.
29. The lighter or guṇa-diphthongs are much more frequent
(6 or 7 times) than the heavier or vṛddhi-diphthongs, and the e and
āi than the o and āu (a half more). Both pairs are somewhat more
than half as common as the simple i - and u-vowels.
30. The general name given by the Hindu grammarians to the vowels
is svara tone; the simple vowels are called samānākṣara homogeneous
syllable, and the diphthongs are called sandhyaksara combination-syllable.
The position of the organs in their utterance is defined to be one of openness,
or of non-closure.
a. Asto quantity and accent, see below, 76 ff., 80 ff.
13 MUTES . [36—
II. Consonants.
31. The Hindu name for 'consonant' is vyañjana manifester.
The consonants are divided by the grammarians into sparśa contact
or mute, antaḥsthā, intermediate or semivowel, and ūṣman spirant.
They will here be taken up and described in this order.
32. Mutes. The mutes, sparśa, are so called as involving a
complete closure or contact sparśa), and not an approximation only,
of the mouth-organs by which they are produced. They are divided
into five classes or series (varga), according to the organs and parts
of organs by which the contact is made; and each series is composed
of five members, differing according to the accompaniments of the
contact.
33. The five mute-series are called respectively guttural,
palatal, lingual (or cerebral), dental, and labial; and they
are arranged in the order as just mentioned, beginning with
the contact made furthest back in the mouth, coming forward from point to point, and ending with the frontmost
contact.
34. In each series there are two surd members, two
sonant, and one nasal (which is also sonant): for example,
in the labial series, 3 p and m ph, ~ b and H hh, and i-T m.
a. The members are by the Hindu grammarians called respectively first,
second, third, fourth, and last or fifth.
b. The surd consonants are known as aghoṣa toneless, and the sonants
as ghoṣavant having tone; and the descriptions of the grammarians are in
accordance with these terms. A l l alike recognise a difference of tone, and not
in any manner a difference of force, whether of contact or of expulsion, as
separating the two great classes in question. That the difference depends on
vivāra opening, or saṁvāra closure (of the glottis), is also recognised
by them.
35. The first and third members of each series are the
ordinary corresponding surd and sonant mutes of European
languages: thus, ~^k and XT^g, cj^t and ~ d, t7^p and ~^b.
36. Nor is the character of the nasal any more doubtful.
What q m is to q p and ~ b, or ^ n to rT t and ~ d, that
is also each other nasal to its own series of mutes: a sonant
expulsion into and through the nose, while the mouthorgans are in the mute-contact.
36-] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 14
a. The Hindu grammarians give distinctly this definition. The nasal
(anunāsika passing through the nose) sounds are declared to be formed by
mouth and nose together; or their nasality (ānunāsikya) to be given them
by unclosure of the nose.
37. The second and fourth of each series are aspirates:
thus, beside the surd mute ~ k we have the corresponding
surd aspirate I-^kh, and beside the sonant JT^g, the corresponding sonant aspirate ~ gh. Of these, the precise character is more obscure and difficult to determine.
a. That the aspirates, all of them, are real mutes or contact sounds, and
not fricatives (like European th and ph and ch, etc.), is beyond question.
b. It is also not doubtful in what way the surd th, for example, differs
from the unaspirated t: such aspirates are found in many Asiatic languages,
and even in some European ; they involve the slipping-out of an audible bit
of flatus or aspiration between the breach of mute-closure and the following
sound, whatever it may be. They are accurately enough represented by the
th etc., with which, in imitation of the Latin treatment of the similar ancient
Greek aspirates, we are accustomed to write them.
c. The sonant aspirates are generally understood and described as made
in a similar way, with a perceptible h-sound after the breach of sonant muteclosure. But there are great theoretical difficulties in the way of accepting
this explanation; and some of the best phonetic observers deny that the modern
Hindu pronunciation is of such a character, and define the element following
the mute as a "glottal buzz", rather, or as an emphasized utterance of the
beginning of the succeeding sound. The question is one of great difficulty,
and upon it the opinions of the highest authorities are much at variance.
Sonant aspirates are still in use in India, in the pronunciation of the vernacular
as well as of the learned languages.
d. By the Prātiśākhyas, the aspirates of both classes are called soṣman:
which might mean either accompanied by a rush of breath (taking ūṣman
in its more etymological sense), or accompanied by a spirant (below, 59).
And some native authorities define the surd aspirates as made by the combination of each surd non-aspirate with its own corresponding surd spirant; and
the sonant aspirates, of each sonant non-aspirate with the sonant spirant, the
h-sound (below, 65). But this would make the two classes of aspirates of
quite diverse character, and would also make th the same as ts, ṭh as ṭṣ, ch
as cś — which is in any measure plausible only of the last. Pāṇini has no
name for aspirates; the scheme given in his comment (to i . 1. 9) attributes
to them mahāprāṇa great expiration, and to the non-aspirates alpaprāṇa
small expiration.
e. It is usual among European scholars to pronounce
both classes of aspirates as the corresponding non-aspirates
15 GUTTURA L A N D PALATA L MUTES . [42—
with a following h: for example, ST^th nearly as in English
boathook, m ph as in haphazard, dh as in madhouse,
H bh as in abhor, and so on. This is (as we have seen above)
strictly accurate only as regards the surd aspirates.
38. The sonant aspirates are (in the opinion of most), or at least
represent, original Indo-European sounds, while the surd aspirates
are a special Indian development. The former are more than twice
as common as the latter. The unaspirated (non-nasal) mutes are very
much more frequent (5 times) than the aspirates (for the special frequency of bh and original gh‚ see 50 and 66); and among them the
surds are more numerous (2-/2 times) than the sonants. The nasals
(chiefly n and m) are nearly as frequent as the surd non-aspirates.
We take up now the several mute-series.
39. Guttura l series: k, I^kh, JT^g, īī^gh, ^ ṅ.
These are the ordinary European k and g-sounds, with their
corresponding aspirates and nasal (the last, like English ng
in singing).
a. The gutturals are defined by the Prātiśākhyas as made by contact of
the base of the tongue with the base of the jaw, and they are called, from the
former organ, jihvāmūlīya tongue-root sounds. The Paninean scheme
describes them simply as made in the throat (kaṇṭha). From the euphonic
influence of a k on a following s (below, 180), we may perhaps infeT that in
their utterance the tongue was well drawn back in the mouth.
40. The k is by far the commonest of the guttural series, occurring considerably more often than all the other four taken together.
The nasal, except as standing before one of the others of the same
series, is found only as final (after the loss of a following k: 386,
407) in a very small number of words, and as product of the assimilation of final k to a following nasal (161).
41. The Sanskrit guttural series represents only a minority
of Indo-European gutturals; these last have suffered more and more
general corruption than any other class of consonants. By processes
of alteration which began in the Indo-European period, the palatal
mutes, the palatal sibilant ś, and the aspiration h, have come from
gutturals. See these various souuds below.
42. Palata l series: 3" c, 5" eh,sT j , ~* jh, 3T ñ.
The whole palatal series is derivative, being generated by the
corruption of original gutturals. The c comes from an original k —
as does also, by another degree of alteration, the palatal sibilant ś
(see below, 64). The j‚ in like manner, comes from a g; but the
42—] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 1 6
Sanskrit j includes in itself two degrees of alteration, one corresponding to the alteration of k to c, the other to that of k to ś (see below,
219). The c is somewhat more common than the j (about as four
to three). The aspirate ch is very much lessfrequent (a tenth of c),
and comes from the original group sk. The sonant aspirate jh is
excessively rare (occurring but once in RV., not once in AV., and
hardly half-a-dozen times in the whole older language); where found,
it is either onomatopoetic or of anomalous or not Indo-European origin.
The nasal, n, never occurs except immediately before — or, in a
small number of words, also after (201) — one of the others of the
same series.
43. Hence, in the euphonic processes of the language, the
treatment of the palatals is in many respects peculiar. In some
situations, the original unaltered guttural shows itself — or, as
it appears from the point of view of the Sanskrit, the palatal reverts
to its original guttural. No palatal ever occurs as a final. The j is
differently treated, according as it represents the one or the other
degree of alteration. And c and j (except artificially, in the algebraic rules of the grammarians) do not interchange, as corresponding
surd and sonant.
44. The palatal mutes are by European scholars, as by
the modern Hindus also, pronounced with the compound
sounds of English ch and j (in church and judge).
a. Their description by the old Hindu grammarians, however, gives them
a not less absolutely simple character than belongs to the other mutes. They
are called tālavya palatal, and declared to be formed against the palate by
the middle of the tongue. They seem to have been, then, brought forward in
the mouth from the guttural point, and made against the hard palate at a
point not far from the lingual one (below, 45), but with the upper flat surface
of the tongue instead of its point. Such sounds, in all languages, pass easily
into the (English) ch- andj-sounds. The value of the eh as making the preceding vowel "long by position" (227), and its frequent origination from t + ś
(203), lead to the suspicion that it, at least, may have had this character from
the beginning: compare 37 d, above.
45. Lingua l series: l ṭ, 3" ṭh, 2 d, ~ ḍh, TTf ṇ. The
lingual mutes are by all the native authorities defined as
uttered with the tip of the tongue turned up and drawn
back into the dome of the palate (somewhat as the usual
English smooth r is pronounced). They are called by the
grammarians mūrdhanya, literally head-sounds, capitals,
cephalics; which term is in many European grammars
1 7 LINGUAL AND DENTA L MUTES. [—47
rendered by 'cerebrals'. In practice, among European Sans¬
kritists, no attempt is made to distinguish them from the
dentals: Z \ is pronounced like rT t, Z ḍ. like d, and so
with the rest.
46. The linguals are another non-original series of sounds,
coming mainly from the phonetic alteration of the next series, the
dentals, but also in part occurring in words that have no traceable
Indo-European connection, and are perhaps derived from the aboriginal languages of India. The tendency to lingualization is a positive one in the history of the language: dentals easily pass into
linguals under the influence of contiguous or neighboring lingual
sounds, but not the contrary; and all the sounds of the class become
markedly more frequent in the later literature. The conditions of
their ordinary occurrence are briefly these: ì. ṣ comes from s, much
more rarely from ś, j, kṣ, in euphonic circumstances stated below
(180, 218 ff.); 2. a dental mute following ṣ is assimilated to it,
becoming lingual (ṭ, ṭh, ṇ: 197); 3. n is often changed to ṇ after a
lingual vowel or semivowel or sibilant in the same word (189 if.);
4. ḍh, which is of very rare occurrence,, comes from assimilation of
a dental after ṣ (198 a) or h (222); 5. ṭ and ḍ come occasionally
by substitution for some other sound which is not allowed to stand
as final (142, 145—7). When originated in these ways, the lingual letters may be regarded as normal; in any other cases of their
occurrence, they are either products of abnormal corruption, or signs
of the non-Indo-European character of the words in which they
appear.
a. In a certain number of passages numerically examined (below, 75),
the abnormal occurrences of lingual mutes weTe less than half of the whole
number (74 out of 159), and most of them (43) were of EL: all were found more
frequent in the later passages. In the Rig-Veda, only 15 words have an abnormal ṭ ; only 6, such aṭh ; only 1, such a ḍ h ; about 20 (including 9 roots,
nearly all of which have derivatives) show an abnormal ḍ, besides 9 that have
ṇ ḍ ; and 30 (including 1 root) show a ṇ.
b. Taken all together, the linguals are by far the rarest class
of mutes (about I-/2 per cent, of the alphabet) — hardly half as frequent even as the palatals.
47. Denta l series: cT t, ST th, T d, dh, --T n. These
are called by the Hindus also dantya dental, and are
described as formed at the teeth (or at the roots of the
teeth), by the tip of the tongue. They are practically the
equivalents of our European t, d, n.
a. But the modern Hindus are said to pronounce their dentals with the
47—] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 18
tip of the tongue thrust well forward against the upper teeth, so that these
sounds get a slight tinge of the quality belonging to the English and Modern
Greek th-sounds. The absence of that quality in the European (especially
the English) dentals is doubtless the reason why to the ear of a Hindu the
latter appear more analogous with hislinguals, and he is apt to use the linguals
in writing European words.
48. The dentals are one of the Indo-European original muteclasses. In their occurrence in Sanskrit they are just about as frequent as all the other four classes taken together.
49. Labia l series: ^ p, m ph, b, ^ bh, *T ß1.
These sounds are called oṣṭhya labial by the Hindu grammarians also. They are, of course, the equivalents of our
p. b, m.
50. The numerical relations of the labials are a little peculiar.
Owing to the absence (or almost entire absence) of b in Indo-European, the Sanskrit b also is greatly exceeded in frequency by bh,
which is the most common of all the sonant aspirates, as ph is the
least common of the surd. The nasal m (notwithstanding its frequent
euphonic mutations when final: 212 ff.) occurs just about as often as
all the other four members of the series together.
a. From an eariy period in the history of the language, but increasingly
later, b and v exchange with one another, or fail to be distinguished ill the
manuscripts. Thus, the double root-forms bṛh and vṛh, bādhand vadh, and
so on. In the Bengal manuscripts, v is widely written instead of more original b.
51. Semivowels: U y, T r, 1, ^ v.
a. The name given to this class of sounds by the Hindu grammariansis
antaḥsthā standing between — either from their character as utterances
intermediate between vowel and consonant, or (more probably) from the circumstance of their being placed between the mutes and spirants in the arrangement of the consonants.
b. The semivowels are clearly akin with the several mute series
in their physical character, and they are classified along with those
series — though not without some discordances of view — by the
Hindu grammarians. They are said to be produced with the organs
slightly in contact (īṣatspṛṣṭa), or in imperfect contact (duḥspṛṣṭa).
52. The r is clearly shown by its influence in the
euphonic processes of the language to be a lingual sound,
or one made with the tip of the tongue turned up into
the dome of the palate. It thus resembles the English
smooth r, and, like this, seems to have been untrilled.
19
SEMIVOWELS . [—55
a. The Paninean scheme reckons r as a lingual. None of the Prātiśākh¬
yas, however, does so ; nor are they entirely consistent with one another in its
description. For the most part, they define it as made at "the roots of the
teeth". This would give it a position like that of the vibrated r; but no authority hints at a vibration as belonging to it.
b. In point of frequency, r stands very high on the list of consonants; it is nearly equal with v‚ n, m, and y, and only exceeded
by t.
53. The 1 is a sound of dental position, and is so
defined and classed by all the native authorities.
a. The peculiar character of an l-sound, as involving expulsion at the
side of the tongue along with contact at its tip, is not noticed by any Hindu
phonetist.
b. The semivowels r and 1 are very widely interchangeable in Sanskrit,
both in roots and in suffixes, and even in prefixes: there are few roots containing a 1 which do not show also forms with r; words written with the one
letter are found in other texts, or in other parts of the same text, written with
the other. In the later periods of the language they are more separated, and the
1 becomes decidedly more frequent, though always much rarer than the r (only
as 1 to 7 or 8 or 10).
54. Some of the Vedic texts have another l-sound, written with
a slightly different character (it is given at the end of the alphabet,
5], which is substituted for a lingual ḍ (as also the same followed
by h for a ḍh) when occurring between two vowels. It is, then,
doubtless a lingual l, one made by breach (at the side of the tongue)
of the lingual instead of the dental mute-closure.
a. Examples are: īle, for ‡Z īḍe, but ^3J īḍya; *
mīlhuṣe, for ïft"ï mīḍhuse, but ïfteīīT mīḍhvān. It is especially
in the Rig-Veda and its auxiliary literature that this substitution is usual.
55. The TJ^y in Sanskrit, as in other languages generally, stands in the closest relationship with the vowel ^ i
(short or long); the two exchange with one another in
cases innumerable.
a. And in the Veda (as the metre shows) an i is very often to be read
where, in conformity with the rules of the later Sanskrit euphony, a y is written. Thus, the final i-vowel of a word remains i before an initial vowel; that
of a stem maintains itself unchanged before an ending; and an ending of derivation — as ya, tya — has i instead of y. Such cases will be noticed in
more detail later. The constancy of the phenomenon in certain words and
classes of words shows that this was no merely optional interchange, Very
probably, the Sanskrit y had everywhere more of an i-character than belongs
to the corresponding European sound.
56—] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 2 0
56. The y is by its physical character a palatal utterance; and
it is classed as a palatal semivowel by the Hindu phonetists. It is
one of the most common of Sanskrit sounds.
57. The ST v is pronounced as English or French v
(German w) by the modern Hindus — except when preceded by a consonant in the same syllable, in which case
it has rather the sound of English w; and European scholars follow the same practice (with or without the same
exception).
a. By its whole treatment in the euphony of the language,
however, the v stands related to an u-vowel precisely as y to an
i-vowel. It is, then, a v only according to the original Roman value
of that letter — that is to say, a w-sound in the English sense;
though (as was stated above for the y) it may well have been less
markedly separated from u than English w, or more like French ou in
oui etc. But, as the original w has in most European languages been
changed to v (English), so also in India; and that from a very early
time: the Paninean scheme and two of the Prātiśākhyas (VPr. and
TPr.) distinctly define the sound as made between the upper teeth
and the lower lip — which, of course, identifies it with the ordinary
modern v-sound. As a matter of practice, the usual pronunciation
need not be seriously objected to; yet the student should not fail
to note that the rules of Sanskrit euphony and the name of "semivowel" have no application except to a w-sound in the English sense:
a v-sound (German w) is no semivowel, but. a* spirant, standing on
the same articulate stage with the English th-sounds and the f.
58. The v is classed as a labial semivowel by the Hindu phonet¬
ical authorities. It has a somewhat greater frequency than the y‚
a. In the Veda, under the same circumstances as the y (above, 55 a),
v is to be read as a vowel, u.
b. As to the interchange of v and b, see above, 50 a.
59. Spirants. Under the name ūṣman (literally heat,
steam, flatus), which is usually and well represented by
spirant, some of the Hindu authorities include all the
remaining sounds of the alphabet; others apply the term
only to the three sibilants and the aspiration — to which
it will here also be restricted.
a. The term is not found in the Paninean scheme; by different treatises the guttural and labial breathings, these and the visarga, or all these
and anusvāra, are also (in addition to the sibilants and h) called ūṣman
2 1
SIBILANTS . [--62
(see APr. i. 31 note). The organs of utterance are described as being in
the position of the mute-series to which each spirant belongs respectively,
but unclosed, or unclosed in the middle.
60. The īī^s. Of the three sibilants, or surd spirants,
this is the one of plainest and least questioned character:
it is the ordinary European s — a hiss expelled between
the tongue and the roof of the mouth directly behind the
upper front teeth.
a. It is, then, dental, as it is classed by all the Hindu authorities. Notwithstanding the great losses which it suffers in Sanskrit
euphony, by conversion to the other sibilants, to r‚ to visarga, etc.,
it is still very high among the consonants in the order of frequency,
or considerably more common than both the other two sibilants
together.
61. The "^ṣ. As to the character of this sibilant, also,
there is no ground for real question: it is the one produced
in the lingual position, or with the tip of the tongue reverted into the dome of the palate. It is, then, a kind of
sh-sound; and by European Sanskritists it is pronounced
as an ordinary sh (French ch, German seh), no attempt
being made (any more than in the case of the other lingual
sounds: 45) to give it its proper lingual quality.
a. Its lingual character is shown by its whole euphonic influence,
and it is described and classed as lingual by all the Hindu authorities (the APr. adds, i. 23, that the tongue in its utterance is troughshaped). In its audible quality, it is a ṣ-sound rather than a s-sound;
and, in the considerable variety of sibilant-utterance, even in the
same community, it may coincide with the sh of some among
ourselves. Yet the general and normal sh is palatal (see below, 63);
and therefore the sign ṣ, marked in accordance with the other lingual letters, is the only unexceptionable transliteration for the Hindu
character.
b. In modern pronunciation in India, ṣ is much confounded with kh;
and the manuscripts are apt to exchange the characters. Some later grammatical treatises, too, take note of the relationship.
62. This sibilant (as was noticed above, 46, and will be more
particularly explained below, 180 ff.) is no original sound, but a
product of the lingualization of s under certain euphonic conditions.
The exceptions are extremely few (9 out of 145 noted occurrences:
75), and of a purely sporadic character. The Rig-Veda has (apart
62-] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS . 2 2
from √ sah, 182 b) only twelve words which show a ṣ under other
conditions.
a. The final s of a root has in some cases attained a more independent value, and does not revert to s when the euphonic conditions are
removed, but shows anomllous forms (225—6).
63. The 5T ś. This sibilant is by all the native authorities classed and described as palatal, nor is there anything in its history or its euphonic treatment to cast doubt
on its character as such. It is, then, made with the flat
of the tongue against the forward part of the palatal arch
— that is to say, it is the usual and normal sh-sound. By
European scholars it is variously pronounced — more often,
perhaps, as s than as sh.
a. The two sh-sounds, ṣ and ś, are made in the same part of the
mouth (the ṣ probably rather further back), but with a different part of
the tongue; and they are doubtless not more unlike than, for example, the
two t-sounds, written ṭ and t; and it would be not less proper to pronounce them both as one sh than to pronounce the linguals and dentals
alike. To neglect the difference of s and ś is much less to be approved.
The very near relationship of ṣ and ś is attested by their euphonic treatment, which is to a considerable extent the same, and by their not infrequent confusion by the writers of manuscripts.
64. As was mentioned above (41), the ś, like c, comes from
the corruption of an original k-sound, by loss of mute-contact as
well as forward shift of the point of production. In virtue of this
derivation, it sometimes (though less often than c) "reverts" to
k — that is, the original k appears instead of it (43); while, on the
other hand, as a sh-sound, it is to a certain extent convertible to ṣ.
In point of frequency, it slightly exceeds the latter.
65. The remaining spirant, eg h, is ordinarily pronounced
like the usual European surd aspiration h.
a. This is not, however, its real character. It is defined by all the native
authorities as not a surd element, but a sonant (or else an utterance intermediate between the two); and its whole value in the euphony ofthe language is that of a sonant: but what is its precise value is very hard to
say. The Paninean scheme ranks it as guttural, as it does also a: this
means nothing. The Prātiśākhyas bring it into no relation with the guttural class; one of them quotes the opinion of some authorities that "it has
the same position with the beginning of the following vowel" (TPr. i i. 47)
—-which so far identifies it with our h. There is nothing in its euphonic
influence to mark it as retaining any trace of gutturally articulated character.
2 3 VisA R G A . [- 69
By some of the native phonetists it is identified with the aspiration of the
sonant aspirates — with the element by which, for example, gh differs
from g. This view is supported by the derivation of h from the aspirates
(next paragraph), by that of 1+h from ḍh (54), and by the treatment of
initial h after a final mute (163).
66. The h, as already noticed, is not an original sound, but
comes in nearly all cases from an older gh (for the few instances of
its derivation from dh and bh, see below, 223g). It is a vastly more
frequent sound than the unchanged gh (namely, as 7 to 1): more frequent, indeed, than any of the guttural mutes except k. It appears,
like j (219), to include in itself two stages of corruption of gh: one
corresponding with that of k to c, the other with that of k to ś;
see below, 223, for the roots belonging to the two classes respectively. Like the other sounds of guttural derivation, it sometimes
exhibits "reversion" (43) to its original.
67. The : ḥ, or visarga (visarjanīya, as it is uniformly
called by the Prātiśākhyas and by Pāṇini, probably as belonging to the end of a syllable), appears to be merely a surd
breathing, a final h-sound (in the European sense of h),
uttered in the articulating position of the preceding vowel.
a. One Prātiśākhya (TPr. i i. 48) gives just this last description of it.
It is by various authorities classed with h, or with h and a: all of them
are alike sounds in whose utterance the mouth-organs have no definite
shaping action.
68. The visarga is not original, but always only a substitute
for final s or r, neither of which is allowed to maintain itself unchanged (170 fF.). It is a comparatively recent member of the alphabetic
system; the other euphonic changes of final s and r have not passed
through visarga as an intermediate stage. And the Hindu authorities
are considerably discordant with one another as to how far ḥ is a
necessary substitute, and how far a permitted one, alternative with
a sibilant, before a following initial surd.
69. Before a surd guttural or labial, respectively, some of the
native authorities permit, while others require, conversion of final s
or r into the so-called jihvāmūlīya and upadhmānīya spirants. It
may be fairly questioned, perhaps, whether these two sounds are not
pure grammatical abstractions, devised (like the long 1-vowel: 23a)
in order to round out the alphabet to greater symmetry. At any
rate, both manuscripts and printed texts in general make no account
of them. Whatever individual character they may have must be,
it would seem, in the direction of the (German) ch- and f-sounds.
When written at all, they are wont to be transliterated by % and y.
70--] I I. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 2 4
70. The – anusvāra, ṃ or ṁ, is a nasal sound lacking
that closure of the organs which is required to make a
nasal mute or contact-sound (36); in its utterance there is
nasal resonance along with some degree of openness of the
mouth.
71. There is discordance of opinion among both the Hindu phonetists
and their modern European successors respecting the real character of this
element; hence a little detail is necessary here with regard to its occurrence and their views of it.
a. Certain nasals in Sanskrit are of servile character, always to be
assimilated to a following consonant, of whatever character that may be*
Such are final m in sentence-combination (213), the penultimate nasal of
a root, and a nasal of increment (255) in general. If one of these nasals
stands before a contact-letter or mute, it becomes a nasal mute corresponding to the latter — that is, a nasal utterance in the same position of the
mouth-organs which givesthe succeeding mute. If, on the other hand, the
following consonant does not involve a contact (being a semivowel or spirant), the nasal element is also without contact: it is a nasal utterance
with unclosed mouth-organs. The question is, now, whether this nasal
utterance becomes merely a nasal infection of the preceding vowel, turning
it into a nasal vowel (as in French on, en, un‚ etc, by reason of a similar
loss of a nasal mute); or whether it is an element of more individual
character, having place between the vowel and the consonant; or, once
more, whether it is sometimes the one thing and sometimes the other.
The opinions of the Prātiśākhyas and Pāṇini are briefly as follows:
b. The Atharva-Prātiśākhya holds that the result is everywhere a
nasalized vowel, except when n or m is assimilated to a following 1; in
that case, the n or m becomes a nasal 1: that is, the nasal utterance is
made in the 1-position, and has a perceptible 1-character.
C The other Prātiśākhyas teach a similar conversion into a nasal
counterpart to the semivowel, or a nasal semivowel, before y and 1 and v
(not before r also). In most of the other cases where the Atharva-Prāti¬
śākhya acknowledges a nasal vowel — namely, before r and the spirants
— the others teach the intervention after the vowel of a distinct nasal
element, called the anusvāra after-tone.
d. Of the nature of this nasal afterpiece to the vowel no intelligibly
clear account is given. It is said (RPr.) to be either vowel or consonant;,
it is declared (RPr,, VPr.) to be made with the nose alone, or (TPr.) to
be nasal like the nasal mutes; it is held by some (RPr.) to be the sonant
tone of the nasal mutes; in its formation, as in that of vowel and spirant,
there is (RPr.) no contact. As to its quantity, see further on.
e.- There are, however, certain cases and classes of cases where these
other authorities also acknowledge a nasal vowel. So, especially, wherever
2 5 ANUSVARA . [—73
a final n is treated (208—9) as if it were ns (its historically older form);
and also in a small number of specified words. They also mention the
doctrine of nasal vowel instead of anusvara as held by some (and TPr.
is uncertain and inconsistent in its choice between the one and the other).
f. In Pāṇini, finally, the prevailing doctrine is that of anusvara
everywhere; and it is even allowed in many cases where the Prātiśākh¬
yas prescribe only a nasal mute. But a nasal semivowel is also allowed
instead before a semivowel, and a nasal vowel is allowed in the cases (mentioned above) where some of the Prātiśākhyas require it by exception.
g. It is evidently a fair question whether this discordance and uncertainty of the Hindu phonetists is owing to a real difference of utterance
in different classes of cases and in different localities, or whether to a
different scholastic analysis of what is really everywhere the same utterance.
If anusvara is a nasal element following the vowel, it cannot well be any
thing but either a prolongation of the same vowel-sound with nasality added,
or a nasalized bit of neutral-vowel sound (in the latter case, however, the
altering influence of an i or u-vowel on a following s ought to be prevented, which is not the case : see 183).
72. The assimilated nasal element, whether viewed as nasalized
vowel, nasal semivowel, or independent anusvara, has the value of
something added, in making a heavy syllable, or length by position (79).
a. The Prātiśākhyas (VPr‚, RPr.) give determinations of the quantity
of the anusvara combining with a short and with a long vowel respectively to make a long syllable.
73. a. Two different signs, i and Z, are found in the manuscripts, indicating the nasal sound here treated of. Usually they are
written above the syllable, and there they seem most naturally to
imply a nasal affection of the vowel of the syllable, a nasal (anunāsika)
vowel. Hence some texts (Sāma- and Yajur-Vedas), when they mean
a real anusvara, bring one of the signs down into the ordinary consonant-place; but the usage is not general. As between the two
signs, some manuscripts employ, or tend to employ, the Z where a
nasalized (anunāsika) vowel is to be recognized, and elsewhere the
i ; and this distinction is consistently observed in many European
printed texts; and the former is called the anunāsika sign: but the
two are doubtless originally and properly equivalent.
b. It is a very common custom of the manuscripts to write the
anusvāra-sign for any nasal following the vowel of a syllable, either
before another consonant or as final (not before a vowel), without
any reference to whether it is to be pronounced as nasal mute, nasal
semivowel, or anusvara. Some printed textsfollow this slovenly and
undesirable habit; but most write a nasal mute whenever it is to be
pronounced — excepting where it is an assimilated m (213).
73–] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS . 26
o. It is convenient also in transliteration to distinguish the assimilated m by a special sign, ṁ, from the anusvara of more independent origin, ṃ; and this method will be followed in the present
work.
74. This is the whole system ofsounds recognised by the written
character; for certain other transitional sounds, more or less widely
recognised in the theories of the Hindu phonetists, see below, 230.
75. The whole spoken alphabet, then, may be arranged
in the following manner, in order to show, so far as is possible in a single scheme, the relations and important classifications of its various members:
Son.
19.78 8-19
i, ī
4.85 1.19
y
4 — 25
ṅ ñ
.22 «35
ṛ, ṝ
•74 >0I
r
5.05
ṇ
1.03
1
01
1
• 69
ṇ
4-Sl
u, ū
2.61 .73
v
4-99
m
4-34
Surd.
Son.
Surd.
ṃ
•G3
h
i.or
ḥ
1 31
9
1 57
gh jh
• 15 .01
g j
.82 .94
kh eh
.13 .17
k c
1-99 1.26
Gutt. Pal.
c
1.26
Pal.
ṣ
1.15
ḍh
• 03
ḍ
.21
ṭh
.06
ṭ
.26
Ling.
s
3-56
dh
• S3
d
2-85
th
.58
t
6.65
Dent.
> Vowels
Semivowels
Nasals
Anusvāra
Aspiration
Visarga
Sibilants
bh asp.
1-27
b unasp.
• 46
ph asp.
.03
p unasp.
2.46
Lab.
Mutes
a. The figures set under the characters give the average percentage of frequency of each sound, found by counting the number
of times which it occurred in an aggregate of 10,000 sounds of continuous text, in ten different passages, of 1,000 sounds each, selected
from different epochs of the literature: namely, two from the Rig-Veda,
one from the Atharva-Veda, two from different Brāhmaṇas, and one
each from Manu, Bhagavad-Gītā, Śakuntalā, Hitopadeśa, and Yāsa¬
vadattā (J.A.O.S., vol. X., p. cl).
2 7 QUANTITY. [-79
III. Quantity of sounds and syllables.
* 76. The Hindu grammarians take the pains to define
the quantity of a consonant (without distinction among
consonants of different classes) as half that of a short vowel.
77. They also define the quantity of a long (dīrgha)
vowel or diphthong as twice that of a short (hrasva) vowel —
making no distinction in this respect between the guṇaand the vṛddhi-diphthongs.
78. Besides these two vowel-quantities, the Hindus
acknowledge a third, called pluta (literally swimming),
or protracted, and having three moras or three times the
quantity of a short vowel. A protracted vowel is marked
by a following figure 3: thus, -STT-j ā3.
a. The protracted vowels are practically of rare occurrence (in
RV., three cases; in AV., fifteen; in the Brāhmaṇa literature, decidedly more frequent). They are used in cases of questioning, especially of a balancing between two alternatives, and also of calling
to a distance or urgently. The protraction is of the last syllable in
a word, or in a whole phrase; and the protracted syllable has usually
the acute tone, in addition to any other accent the word may have;
sometimes it takes also anusvāra, or is made nasal.
b. Examples are: adháḥ svid āsī́3d upári svid āsījt (RV.)
was it, forsooth, below? was it, forsooth, above? idám bhū́yā́3 idā́3m
íti (AV.) saying, is this more, or is that? ágnā́3i pátnīvā́3h sómam
piba (TS.) 0 Agni! thou with thy spouse! drink the soma.
c. A diphthong is protracted by prolongation of its first or a-element :
thus, e to āii 9 o to ā3u.
d. The sign of protraction is also sometimes written as the result of
accentual combination, when so-called kampa occurs: see below, 90 c, d.
79. For metrical purposes, syllables (not vowels) are
distinguished by the grammarians as heavy (guru) or light
(laghu). A syllable is heavy if its vowel is long, or short
and followed by more than one consonant ("long by position"). Anusvāra and visarga count as full consonants in
79—] I I. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 2 8
making a heavy syllable. The last syllable of a pāda (primary division of a verse) is reckoned as either heavy or
light.
a. The distinction in terms between the difference of long and short
in vowel-sound and that of heavy and light in syllable-construction is valuable, and should be observed.
IV. Accent.
80. The phenomena of accent are, by the Hindu grammarians of all ages alike, described and treated as depending on a variation of tone or pitch; of any difference of
stress involved, they make no account.
81. The primary tones (svara) or accent-pitches are
two: a higher (udātta raised), or acute; and a lower
(anudātta not raised), or grave. A third (called svarita:
a term of doubtful meaning) is always of secondary origin,
being (when not enclitic: see below, 85) the result of actual
combination of an acute vowel and a following grave vowel
into one syllable. It is also uniformly defined as compound
in pitch, a union of higher and lower tone within the
limits of a single syllable. It is thus identical in physical
character with the Greek and Latin circumflex, and fully
entitled to be called by the same name.
82. Strictly, therefore, there is but one distinction of tone in
the Sanskrit accentual system, as described by the native grammarians
and marked in the written texts: the accented syllable is raised in tone
above the unaccented; while then further, in certain cases of the
fusion of an accented and an unaccented element into one syllable,
that syllable retains the compounded tone of both elements.
83. The svarita or circumflex is only rarely found on a pure
long vowel or diphthong, but almost always on a syllable in which
a vowel, short or long, is preceded by a y or v representing an originally acute i - or u-vowel.
a. In transliteration, in this work, the udātta or acute will be
marked with the ordinary sign of acute, and the svarita or circumflex (as being a downward slide of the voice forward) with what is
usually called the grave accent: thus, á, acute, yà or và, circumflex.
2 9 ACCENT . [—85
84. The Prátiśākhyas distinguish and name separately the circum¬
flexed tones arising by different processes of combination: thus, the circumflex is called
a. Kṣāipra (quick), when an acute i or u-vowel (short or long)
is converted into y or v before a dissimilar vowel of grave tone: thus,
vyapta from ví-āpta, apsvàntár from apsú antár.
b. Jātya (native) or nitya (own), when the same combination
lies further back, in the make-up of a stem or form, and so is constant,
or belongs to the word in all circumstances of its occurrence: thus, kvà
(from kúa), svàr (súar), nyàk (níak), budhnyà (budhnía), konya
(kaníā), nadyàs (nadī́-as), tanvà (tanū́-ā).
c. The words of both the above classes are in the Veda, in the great majority of cases, to be read with restoration of the acute vowel as a separate
syllable: thus, apsú antár, súar, nadī́as, etc. In some texts, part of
them are written correspondingly: thus, súvar, tanúvā, budhníya.
d. Praśliṣṭa, when the acute and grave vowels are of such character that they are fused into a long vowel or diphthong (128 c): thus
divi 'va (RV. AV. etc.), from diví iva; sū̀dgātā (TS.), from sú-ud¬
gātā; nāì 'va 'śnīyāt (ŚB.), from ná evá aśnīyāt.
e. Abhinihita, when an initial grave a is absorbed by a final acute
é or ó (135 a): thus, tê *bruvan, from té abruvan; so 'bravīt, from
so abravīt.
85. But further, the Hindu grammarians agree in declaring the (naturally grave) syllable following an acute,
whether in the same or in another word, to be svarita or
circumflex — unless, indeed, it be itself followed by an
acute or circumflex; in which ease it retains its grave tone.
This is called by European scholars the enclitic or dependent circumflex.
a. Thus, in tén a and t é ca, the syllable na and word ca are
regarded and marked as circumflex; but in tén a t é and t é ca svà r
they are grave.
b. This seems to mean that the voice, which is borne up at the
higher pitch to the end of the acute syllable, does not ordinarily drop to
grave pitch by an instantaneous movement, but descends by a more or less
perceptible slide in the course of the following syllable. No Hindu authority suggests the theory of a middle or intermediate tone for the enclitic,
any more than for the independent circumflex. For the most part, the two
are identified with one another, in treatment and designation. The enclitic circumflex is likewise divided into a number of sub-varieties, with
different names: they are of too little consequence to be worth reporting.
86—] II. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 3 0
86. The essential difference of the two kinds of circumflex is
shown clearly enough by these facts: I. the independent circumflex
takes the place of the acute as the proper accent of a word, while
the enclitic is the mere shadow following an acute, and following it
in another word precisely as in the same word; 2. the independent
circumflex maintains its character in all situations, while the enclitic
before a following circumflex or acute loses its circumflex character,
and becomes grave; moreover, 3. in many of the systems of marking
accent (below, 88), the two are quite differently indicated.
87. The accentuation is marked in manuscripts only of the
older literature: namely, in the primary Vedic texts, or saṁhitās,
in two of the Brāhmaṇas (Tāittirīya and Śatapatha), in the TāittirīyaĀraṇyaka, in certain passages of the Āitareya-Āraṇyaka, and in the
Suparṇādhyāya. There are a number of methods of writing accent,
more or less different from one another; the one found in manuscripts of the Rig-Veda, which is most widely known, and of which
most of the others are only slight modifications, is as follows.
a. The acute syllable is left unmarked; the circumflex, whether
independent or enclitic, has a short perpendicular stroke above; and
the grave next preceding an acute or (independent) circumflex has a
short horizontal stroke below. Thus,
EīfÖīī agním; -īī"-f-TfFT juhóti; nF^T tanva; 1fT kvà.
b. But the introductory grave stroke below cannot be given if an
acute syllable is initial; hence an unmarked syllable at the beginning
of a word is to be understood a3 acute; and hence also, if several
grave syllables precede an acute at the beginning of a sentence, they
must all alike have the grave sign. Thus,
" " ; mdraḥ; rT te; kariṣyási; HT“T“T tuvijāta.
c. All. the grave syllables, however, which follow a marked circumflex are left unmarked, until the occurrence of another accented
syllable causes the one which precedes it to take the preparatory
stroke below. Thus,
īī^fNīīí^ sudṛ́śīkasaṁdṛk;
but īī~Tt~H^J l-1H^sudṛ́śīkasaṁdṛg gávām.
d. If an independent circumflex be followed by an acute (or by
another independent circumflex), a figure 1 is set after the former
circumflexed vowel if it be short, or a figure 3 if it be long, and
the signs of accent are applied as in the following examples:
t^^W ! apsv àmtáḥ (from apsú antáḥ);
‡Td"T!}~T*r. rāyb) vániḥ (from rāyó avániḥs
3 1
ACCENT . [—89
The rationale of this mode of designation is not well understood; the
Prātiśākhyas give no account of it. In the scholastic utterance of the syllable so designated is made a peculiar quaver or roulade of the voice,
called kampa or vikampana.
e. The accent-marks are written with red ink in the manuscripts,
being added after the text is written, and perhaps often by another hand.
88 a. Nearly accordant with this, the Rig-Veda method of designating accent, are the methods employed in the manuscripts of the AtharvaVeda, of the Vājasaneyi-Sanihitā, and of the Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā, Brāhmaṇa,
and Āraṇyaka. Their differences from it are of trifling importance, consisting mainly in peculiar ways of marking the circumflex that precedes an
acute (87 d). In some manuscripts of the Atharva-Veda, the accentmarks are dots instead of strokes, and that for the circumflex is made within the syllable instead of above it.
b. In most manuscripts of the Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā, the acute syllable itself, besides its surroundings, is marked — namely, by a perpendicular stroke above the syllable (like that of the ordinary circumflex in the
RV. method). The independent circumflex has a hook beneath the syllable, and the circumflex before an acute (87 d) is denoted simply by a
figure 3‚ standing before instead of after the circumflexed syllable.
c. The Śatapatha – Brāhmaṇa uses only a single accent-sign, the
horizontal stroke beneath the syllable (like the mark for grave inRV.).
This is put under an acute, or, if two or more acutes immediately follow
one another, only under the last of them. To mark an independent circumflex, it is put under the preceding syllable. The method is an imperfect
one, allowing many ambiguities.
d. The Sāma-Veda method is the most intricate of all. It has a dozen
different signs, consisting offigures,or offiguresand letters combined, all placed
above the syllables, and varying according both to the accentual character
of the syllable and to its surroundings. Its origin is obscure ; if anything more is indicated by it than by the other simpler systems, the fact
has not been demonstrated.
89. In this work, as everything given in the devanāgarī characters is also given in transliteration, it will in general be unnecessary to mark the accent except in the transliterated form; where,
however, the case is otherwise, there will be adopted the method
of marking only the really accented syllables, the acute and the independent circumflex: the latter by the usual svarita-sign, the former by
a small u (for udātta ) above the syllable: thus,
índra , § n ágne, svàr, TOH^nadyàs.
a. These being given, everything else which the Hindu theory recognizes as dependent on and accompanying them can readily be understood
as implied.
90—] I I. SYSTE M OF SOUNDS. 32
90. The theory of the Sanskrit accent, as here given (a consistent
and intelligible body of phenomena), has been overlaid by the Hindu theorists, especially of the Prátiśākhyas, with a number of added features, of
a much more questionable character. Thus:
a. The unmarked grave syllables following a circumflex (either at the
end of a sentence, or till the near approach of another acute) are declared
to have the same high tone with the (also unmarked) acute. They are
called pracaya or pracita (accumulated: because liable to occur in an
indefinite series of successive syllables).
b. The circumflex, whether independent or enclitic, is declared to
begin on a higher pitch than acute, and to descend to acute pitch in ordinary cases: the concluding instant of it being brought down to grave pitch,
however, in the case of an independent circumflex which is immediately
followed by another ascent of the voice to higher pitch, in acute or independent circumflex (a kampa syllable: 87 d).
c. Pāṇini gives the ambiguous name of ekaśrut i (monotone") to the
pracit a syllables, and says nothing of the uplifting of the circumflex to
a higher plane; he teaches, however, a depression below the grave pitch
for the marked grave syllable before acute or circumflex, calling it sanna¬
tara (otherwise anudāttatara).
91. The system of accentuation as marked in the Vedic texts appears
to have assumed in the traditional recitation of the Brahmanic schools
a peculiar and artificial form, in which the designated syllables, grave and
circumflex (equally the enclitic and the independent circumflex), have acquired a conspicuous value, while the undesignated, the acute, has sunk
into insignificance.
92. The Sanskrit accent taught in the native grammars and
represented by the accentuated texts is essentially a system of wordaccent only. No general attempt is made (any more than in the
Greek system) to define or mark a sentence-accent, the effect of the
emphasis and modulation of the sentence in modifying the independent accent of individual words. The only approach to it is seen
in the treatment of vocatives and personal verb-forms.
a. A vocative is usually without accent except at the beginning
of a sentence: for further details, see 314.
b. A personal verb-form is usually accentless in an independent
clause, except when standing at the beginning of the clause: for
further details, see 591 ff.
93. Certain other words also are, usually or always, without
accent.
a. The particles ca, vā , u, sma, iva , cid,svid, ha, and the Vedic
k am (or kam), gha, bhala, samaha, īm, sīm, are always without
accent; also yath ā in RV. (sometimes also elsewhere) in the sense of iva ,
at the end of a pād a or verse-division.
3 3 ACCENT . [—96
b. The same is true of certain pronouns and pronominal stems: ma.
me, nāu, nas, tvā, te, vām, vas (491b), ena (500), tva (503b),
sama (513c),
c The cases of the pronominal stem a are sometimes accented and
sometimes accentless (502).
d. An accentless word is not allowed to stand at the beginning
of a sentence; also not of a pāda or primary division of a verse; a
pāda is, in all matters relating to accentuation, treated like an independent sentence.
94. Some words have more than a single accented syllable.
Such are:
a. Certain dual copulative compounds in the Veda (see 1255), as
mitrā́váruṇā, dyā́vāpṛthivī́. Also, a few other Vedic compounds
(see 1267d), as bṛ́haspáti, tánūnápāt.
b. In a few cases, the further compounds and derivatives of such
compounds, as dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant, bṛ́haspátipraṇutta.
c. Infinitive datives in tavāí (see 972 a), as étavāí, ápabhar¬
tavāí.
d. A word naturally barytone, but having its final syllable protracted
(see 78a).
e. The particle vā́vá (in the Brāhmaṇas),
95. On the place of the accented syllable in a Sanskrit word there is no restriction whatever depending upon
either the number or the quantity of the preceding or
following syllables. The accent rests where the rules of
inflection or derivation or composition place it, without
regard to any thing else.
a. Thus, índre, agnaú, índreṇa, agnínā, agnīnā́m, bāhúcyuta,
ánapaeyuta, parjányajinvita, abhimātiṣāhá, ánabhimlātavarṇa,
abhiśasticā́tana, híraṇyavāśīmattama, cátuścatvāriṃśadakṣara.
96. Since the accent is marked only in the older literature, and the statements of the grammarians, with the
deduced rules of accentuation, are far from being sufficient
to settle all cases, the place of the stress of voice for a
considerable part of the vocabulary is undetermined. Hence
it is a general habit with European scholars to pronounce
Sanskrit words according to the rules of the Latin accent.
97—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION . 3 4
97. In this work, the accent of each word and form will in
general be marked, so far as there is authority determining its place
and character. Where specific words and forms are quoted, they
will only be so far accentuated as they are found with accent in
accentuated texts.
CHAPTE R III .
RULES OF EUPHONIC COMBINATION.
Introductory.
98. The words in Sanskrit, as in the other languages related
with it, are in great part analysable into roots, suffixes of derivation,
and endings of inflection, these last being added mostly to stems
containing suffixes, but also sometimes directly to roots.
a. There are, of course, a certain number of uninfleoted words —
indeclinables, particles; and also not a few that are incapable of analysis.
99. The Sanskrit, indeed, possesses an exceptionally analysable
character; Us formative processes are more regular and transparent
than those of any other Indo-European tongue. Hence the prevailing
method of the Hindu native science of grammar, which sets up a certain body of roots, and prescribes the processes by which these may
be made stems and words, giving the various added elements, and
laying down the rules by which their combination is effected. And
the same general method is, for like reason, followed also by European
grammarians.
100. The euphonic laws, accordingly, which govern the combination of suffix or of ending with root or stem, possess a high
practical importance, and require to be laid down in preparation for
the topics of declension and conjugation.
101. Moreover, the formation of compounds, by joining two
or more simple stems, is extremely frequent in Sanskrit; and this
kind of combination has its own peculiar euphonic rules. And once
more, in the form of the language as handed down to us by its literature, the words composing a sentence or paragraph are adapted to
and combined with one another by nearly the same rules which govern
the making of compounds; so that it is impossible to take apart and
understand a Sanskrit sentence without knowing those rules. Hence
3 5 INTRODUCTORY. [—103
an increased degree of practical importance belonging to the subject
of euphonic combination.
a. This euphonic interdependence of the words of a sentence is unknown to any other language in anything like the same degree; and it
cannot but be suspected of being at least in part artificial, implying an
erection into necessary and invariable rules of what in the living language
were only optional practices. This is strongly indicated, indeed, by the
evidence of the older dialect of the Vedas and of the derived Prakritic
dialects, in both of which some of the rules (especially that as to the hiatus: see 113) are often violated.
102. The roots which are authenticated by their occurrence in
the literary monuments of the language, earlier and later, number
between eight and nine hundred. About half of these belong fully
to the language throughout its whole history; some (about a hundred and fifty) are limited to the earlier or pre-classical period;
some, again (over a hundred and twenty), make their first appearance in the later language.
a. There are in this number roots of very diverse character. Those
occurring only later are, at least in great part, presumably of secondary
origin; and a certain number are even doubtless artificial, used once or
twice because found in the root-lists of the Hindu grammarians (103).
But also of the rest, some are plainly secondary, while others are questionable ; and not a few are variations or differentiated forms of one another.
Thus, there are roots showing respectively r and 1, as rabh and labh,
mruc and mluc, kṣa r and kṣal ; roots with and without a strengthening nasal, as vand and vad, mand and mad; roots in ā and in a nasal,
as k h ā and khan, ga and gam, j ā and jan ; roots made by an added
ā, as t r ā from tṛ, m n ā from man, p s ā from bhas, y a from i ; roots
the product of reduplication, as jakṣ from ghas, dudh from dhū ; roots
with a final sibilant of formative origin, as bhakṣ and bhikṣ from bhaj,
nakṣ from naś, śru ṣ from śru , has from h ā ; root-forms held apart by
a well-established discordance of inflection and meaning, which yet are
probably different sides of one root, as k ṛṣ drag and k ṛṣ 'plough, v i d know
and v i d find, v ṛ enclose and v ṛ choose; and so on. In many such cases
it is doubtful whether we ought to acknowledge two roots or only one;
and no absolute rule of distinction can be laid down and maintained.
103. The list of roots given by the Hindu grammarians contains
about two thousand roots, without including all those which students of
the language are compelled to recognize. Considerably more than half of
this number, then, are unauthenticated by use; and although some of
these may yet come to light, or may have existed without finding their
way into any of the preserved literary documents, it is certain that most
are fictitious: made in part for the explanation of words falsely described
as their derivatives, but in the main for unknown and perhaps undiscover¬
able reasons.
103—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION . 3 6
a. The roots unauthenticated by traceable use will be made no account
of in this grammar — or, if noticed, will be specified as of that character.
104. The forms of the roots as here used will be found to
differ in certain respects from those given by the native grammarians
and adopted by some European works. Thus:
a. Those roots of which the initial n and s are regularly converted
to ṇ and ṣ after certain prefixes are by the Hindu grammarians given as
beginning with n and ṣ; no western authority follows this example.
b. The Hindus classify as simple roots a number of derived stems:
reduplicated ones, as dīdhī, jāgṛ, daridrā; present-stems, as ūrṇu ;
and denominative stems, as avadhīr, kumār, sabhāg, mantr, sāntv,
arth, and the like. These are in European works generally reduced to
their true value.
c. A number of roots ending in an ā which is irregularly treated
in the present-system are written in the Hindu lists with diphthongs —
e or āi or o; here they will be regarded as ā-roots (see 251). The o of
such root-forms, especially, is purely arbitrary; no forms or derivatives
made from the roots justify it.
d. The roots showing interchangeably ṛ and ir and īr or ur and
ūr (242) are written by the Hindus with ṛ or with f, or with both. The
f here also is only formal, intended to mark the roots as liable to certain
modifications, since it nowhere shows itself in any form or derivative. Such
roots will in this work be written with ṛ.
e. The roots, on the other hand, showing a variation between ṛ and
ar (rarely ra) as weak and strong forms will be here written with ṛ, as by
the native grammarians, although many European authorities prefer the
other or strong form. So long as we write the unstrengthened vowel in
vid and śī, in mud and bhū, and their like, consistency seems to require that we write it in sṛj and kṛ also — in all cases alike, without
reference to what may have been the more original Indo-European form.
105. In many cases of roots showing more than one form, the selection of a representative form is a matter of comparative indifference. To
deal with such cases according to their historical character is the part
rather of an Indo-European comparative grammar than of a Sanskrit grammar. We must be content to accept as roots what elements seem to have
on the whole that value in the existing condition of the language.
106. Stems as well as roots have their variations of form (311).
The Hindu grammarians usually give, the weaker form as the normal
one, and derive the other from it by a strengthening change; some
European authorities do the same, while others prefer the contrary
method; the choice is of unessential consequence, and may be determined in any case by motives of convenience.
107. We shall accordingly consider first of all, in the present
chapter, the euphonic principles and laws which govern the combi-
3 7 INTRODUCTORY. [--109
nation of the elements of words and of words as elements of the
sentence; then will be taken up the subject of inflection, under the
two heads of declension and conjugation; and an account of the
classes of uninflected words will follow.
a. The formation of conjugational stems (tense and mode-stems;
also participles and infinitive) will be taught, as is usual, in connection with the processes of conjugational inflection; that of uninflected
words, in connection with the various classes of those words. But
the general subject of derivation, or the formation of declinable stems,
will be taken up by itself later (chap. XVII.); and it will be followed
by an account of the formation of compound stems (chap. XVIII.).
108. It is by no means to be expected of beginners
in the language that they will attempt to master the rules
of euphonic combination in a body, before going on to learn
the paradigms of inflection. On the contrary, the leading
paradigms of declension may best be learned outright,
without attention, or with only a minimum of attention,
to euphonic rule. In taking up conjugation, however, it
is practically, as well as theoretically, better to learn the
forms as combinations of stem and ending, with attention to such laws of combination as apply in the particular
cases concerned. The rules of external combination, governing the make-up of the sentence out of words, should
be grappled with only when the student is prepared to begin
the reading or the formation of sentences.
Principles of Euphonic Combination.
109. The rules of combination (saṁdhi putting together)
are in some respects different, according as they apply —
a. to the internal make-up of a word, by the addition
of derivative and inflectional endings to roots and stems;
b. to the more external putting together of stems to
make compound stems, and the yet looser and more accidental collocation of words in the sentence.
c. Hence they are usually divided into rules of internal
combination, and rules of external combination.
110—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 38
110. In both classes of cases, however, the general principles
of combination are the same — and likewise, to a great extent, the
specific rules. The differences depend in part on the occurrence or
non-occurrence of certain combinationsin the one class or the other;
in part, on the difference of treatment of the same sound as final of
a root or of an ending, the former being more persistent than the
latter; in part, on the occurrence in external combination of certain
changes which are apparently phonetic but really historical; and, most
frequent and conspicuous of all, on the fact that (157) vowels and
semivowels and nasals exercise a sonantizing influence in external
combination, but not in internal. Hence, to avoid unnecessary repetition as well as the separation of what really belongs together, the
rules for both kinds of combination are given below in connection
with one another.
111. a. Moreover, before case-endings beginning with bh and
s (namely, bhyām, bhis, bhyas, su), the treatment of the finals of
stems is in general the same as in the combinations of words (pada)
with one another — whence those endings are sometimes called
pada-endings, and the cases they form are known as pada-cases.
b. The importance of this distinction issomewhat exaggerated by the
ordinary statement of if. In fact, dh is the only sonant mute initial of an
ending occurring in conjugation, as bh in declension; and the difference of
their treatment is in part owing to the one coming into collision usually
with the final of a root and the other of an ending, and in part to the fact
that dh, as a dental, is more assimilable to palatals and linguals than bh.
A more marked and problematic distinction is made between su and the
verbal endings si, sva, etc, especially after palatal sounds and ṣ.
c. Further, before certain of the suffixes of derivation the final
of a stem is sometimes treated in the same manner as that of a
word in composition.
d. This is especially the case before secondary suffixes having a
markedly distinct office, like the possessive mant and vant, the abstractmaking tva, the suffix of material maya, and so on; and it is much
more frequent in the later language than in the earlier. The examples are
sporadic in character, and no rule can be given to cover them: for details,
see the various suffixes, in chap. XVII. In the RV. (as may be mentioned here) the only examples are vidyunmant (beside garútmant, kakúd¬
mant, etc.), pṛ́ṣadvant (beside datvánt, marútvant, etc.), dhṛṣadvín
(beside namasvín etc.), śagmá (beside ajmá, idhmá, etc.), mṛnmáya
(beside manasmáya etc.), and ahaṁyú, kiṁyú, śaṁyú, and aṃhoyú,
duvoyú, áskṛdhoyu (beside namasyú, vacasyú, etc.); and the AV.
adds only sáhovan (RV. sahā́van).
112. The leading rules of internal combination (as already stated:
108) are those which are of most immediate importance to a beginner in
the language, since his first task is to master the principal paradigms of
3 9 GENERA L PRINCIPLES . [—117
inflection; the rules of external combination may better be left untouched
until he comes to dealing with words in sentences, orto translating. Then,
however, they are indispensable, since the proper form of the words that
compose the sentence is not to be determined without them.
a. The general principles of combination underlying the euphonic
rules, and determining their classification, may be stated as follows:
113. Hiatus. In general, hiatus is forbidden; every
syllable except the initial one of a sentence, or of a word
or phrase not forming part of a sentence, must begin with
a consonant (or with more than one).
a. For details, and for exceptions, see 125 ff.
b. In the earlier language, however, hiatus in every position was
abundantly admitted. This appears plainly from the mantras, or metrical
parts of the Veda, where in innumerable instances y and v are to be read
as i and u, and, less often, a long vowel is to be resolved into two vowels,
in order to make good the metre: e. g,, vāryāṇām has to be read as vāri-ā-ṇa-ām, svaśvyam as su-aś-vi-am, and so on. In the Brāhmanas,
also, we find tvac, svar, dyāus described as dissyllables, vyāna and
satyam as trisyllables, rājanya as of four syllables, and the like. See
further 129e.
114. Deaspiration. An aspirate mute is liable to
lose its aspiration, being allowed to stand unchanged only
before a vowel or semivowel or nasal.
115. Assimilation . The great body of euphonic
changes in Sanskrit, as elsewhere, falls under the general
head of assimilation — which takes place both between
sounds which are so nearly alike that the difference between
them is too insignificant to be worth preserving, and between
those which are so diverse as to be practically incompatible.
116. In part, assimilation involves the conversion of
one sound to another of the same series, without change of
articulating position; in part, it involves a change of position,
or transfer to another series.
117. Of changes within the series, the most frequent and important occur in the adaptation of surd and sonant sounds to one
117—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 4 0
another; but the nasals and 1 have also in certain cases their special
assimilative influence. Thus;
a. In the two classes of non-nasal mutes and spirants, surd and sonant
are wholly incompatible; no surd of either class can either precede or follow
a sonant of either.
b. A mute, surd or sonant, is assimilated by being changed to its
correspondent of the other kind; of the spirants, the surd s is the only one
having a sonant correspondent, namely r‚ to which it is convertible in external combination (164 ff.).
c. The nasals are more freely combinable: a nasal may either precede
or follow a mute of either kind, or the sonant spirant h; it may also follow
a suTd spirant (sibilant); no nasal, however, ever precedes a sibilant in the
interior of a word (it is changed instead to anusvara); and in external combination their concurrence is usually avoided by insertion of a surd mute.
d. A semivowel has still less sonantizing influence; and a vowel least
of all: both are freely preceded and followed by sounds of every other
class, in the interior of a word.
e. Before a sibilant, however, is found, of the semivowels, only r and
very rarely I. Moreover, in external combination, r is often changed to its
surd correspondent s.
But
f. In composition and sentence-collocation, initial vowels and semivowels and nasals also require the preceding final to be sonant And
g. Before a nasal and 1, the assimilative process is sometimes carried
further, by the conversion of a final mute to a nasal or 1 respectively.
118. Of conversions involving a change of articulate position,
the most important are those of dental sounds to lingual, and, less
often, to palatal. Thus:
a. The dental s and n are very frequently converted to ṣ and n. by
the assimilating influence of contiguous or neighboring lingual sounds: the s,
even by sounds —- namely, i- and u-vowels and k — which have themselves no lingual character.
b. A non-nasal dental mute is (with a few exceptions in external
combination) made lingual when it comes into collision with a lingual sound.
c. The dental mutes and sibilant are made palatal by a contiguous
palatal.
But also:
d. A m (not radical) is assimilated to a following consonant, of whatever kind.
e. For certain anomalous cases, see 151.
119. The euphonic combinations of the palatal mutes, the palatal sibilant, and the aspiration, as being sounds derived by phonetic
alteration from more original gutturals (42 ff.), are made peculiar
4 1 GENERA L PRINCIPLES . [—124
and complicated by two circumstances: their reversion to a guttural
form (or the appearance of the unaltered guttural instead of them:
43); and the different treatment of j and h according as they represent one or another degree of alteration — the one tending, like c‚
more to the guttural reversion, the other showing, like ś‚ a more
sibilant and lingual character.
120. The lingual sibilant ṣ, also of derivative character (from
dental s), shows as radical final peculiar and problematic phenomena
of combination.
121. Extensio n and abbreviation of consonant-groups. The native grammarians allow or require
certain extensions, by duplication or insertion, of groups of
consonants. And, on the other hand, abbreviation of certain other groups is allowed, and found often practised in
the manuscripts.
122. Permitte d Finals. The permitted occurrence
of consonants at the end of a word is quite narrowly restricted. In general, only one consonant is allowed after
the last vowel; and that must be neither the aspiration,
nor a sibilant, nor a semivowel (save rarely ?T 1), nor an
aspirate mute, nor a sonant mute if not nasal, nor a palatal.
123. Increment and Decrement. Besides these
more or less regular changes accompanying the combination
of the parts that make up words, there is another class of
a different character, not consisting in the mutual adaptations of the parts, but in strengthening or weakening
changes of the parts themselves.
124. It is impossible to carry through a perfectly systematic
arrangement of the detailed rules of euphonic combination, because
the different varieties of euphonic change more or less overlap and
intersect one another. The order observed below will be as follows:
1. Rules of vowel combination, for the avoidance of hiatus.
2. Rules as to permittedfinals(since these underlie the further
treatment of final consonants in external combination).
3. Rules for loss of aspiration of an aspirate mute.
4. Rules of surd and sonant assimilation, including those for
final s and r.
124—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 4 2
5. Rules for the conversion of dental sounds to lingual and
palatal.
6. Rules for the changes of final nasals, including those in
which a former final following the nasal re-appears in combination.
7. Rules regarding the special changes of the derivative sounds
— the palatal mutes and sibilant, the aspiration, and the lingual sibilant.
8. Rules as to extension and abbreviation of consonant groups.
9. Rules for strengthening and weakening processes.
Everywhere, rules for more sporadic and less classifiable cases
will be given in the most practically convenient connection; and the
Index will render what help is needed towardfindingthem.
Rules of Vowel Combination.
125. The concurrence of two vowels, or of vowel and
diphthong, without intervening consonant, is forbidden by
the euphony of the later or classical language. It is avoided,
according to the circumstances of the case, either by fusion
of the two concurrent sounds into one, by the reduction of
one of them to a semivowel, or by development of a semivowel between them.
a. For the not infrequent cases of composition and sentence-combination in which the recent loss of a s or y or v between vowels leaves
a permanent hiatus, see below, 132 ff., 175—7; for certain final vowels
which are maintained unchanged in sentence-combination before an initial
vowel, see 138.
b. A very few words in their admitted written form show interior
hiatus; such are títa ü sieve (perhaps for titasu, BR.), práüg a wagonpole (for prayuga); and, in RV., suūtí.
c. The texts of the older dialect are written according to the euphonic
rules of the later language, although in them (see 113b) the hiatus is
really of frequent occurrence. Hence they are not to be read as written,
but with constantly recurring reversal of the processes of vowel-combination
which they have been made artificially to undergo. See further 129e.
d. Also in the later language, hiatus between the two pāda s or
primary divisions of a metrical line is tolerably frequent, and it is not
unknown in sporadic cases even in the interior of a pāda .
e. The rules of vowel combination, as regards both the resulting sound and its accent, are nearly the same in internal and in
external saṁdhi.
4 3 VOWEL COMBINATION. [—127
126. Two similar simple vowels, short or long, coalesce
and form the corresponding long vowel: thus, two a-vowels
(either or both of them short or long) form ETT ā; two i-vowC
els, ^ ī; two u-vowels, "37 ū; and, theoretically, two ṛ-vow¬
els form f‡ ṛ, but it is questionable whether the case ever
practically occurs. Examples are:
īī ~ra™: sa cā 'prajaḥ (ca + aprajaḥ);
-SIcftcT atī 'va (ati + iva);
HrhH^sūktam (su-uktam);
•^TxTÍTTÌ"^ rājā "sīt (rājā-+āsīt);
-īTUÌ^": adhīśvaraḥ (adhi-īśvaraḥ);
g~rqHrT^juhūpabhṛt (juhū — upabhṛt).
a. As the above examples indicate, it will be the practice everywhere
in this work, in transliteration (not in the devanāgarī text), to separate
independent words; and if an initial vowel of a following word has coalesced
with a final of the preceding, this will be indicated by an apostrophe —
single if the initial vowel be the shorter, double if it be the longer, of the
two different initials which in every case of combination yield the same result.
127. An a-vowel combines with a following i-vowel to
" e; with an u-vowel, to o; with ft ṛ, to ar; with
5T \ (theoretically), to 5(5T a l ; with " e or ^ āi, to ^ āi; with
air o or -ft āu, to - i t āu. Examples are:
"^f-Trājendra (rāja-indra);
f%HN^5ī: hitopadeśaḥ (hita-upadeśaḥ);
H^rísj": maharṣiḥ (mahā-ṛṣiḥ);
ffo sāi 'va (sā+eva);
^ rājāiśvary am (rāja-āiśvaryam);
f^-?ì~Tī: divāukasaḥ (divā-okasaḥ);
5qT^T-íīī^jvarāuṣadham (jvara-āuṣadham).
a. In the Vedic texts, the vowel ṛ is ordinarily written unchanged
after the a-vowel, which, if long, is shortened: thus, mahaṛṣiḥ instead of
maharṣiḥ. The two vowels, however, are usually pronounced as one syllable.
b. When successive words like indra ā ihi are to be combined, the
first combination, to indrā, is made first, and the result is indre " 'hi (not
indrāi" 'hi, from indra e 'hi).
128—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 4 4
128. As regards the accent of these vowel combinations, it is
to be noticed that, I. as a matter of course, the union of acute with
acute yields acute, and that of grave with grave yields grave; that
of circumflex with circumflex cannot occur; 2. a circumflex with
following acute yields acute, the final grave element of the former
being raised to acute pitch; a grave with following acute does the
same, as no upward slide of the voice on a syllable is acknowledged
in the language; but, 3. when the former of the fused elements is
acute and the latter grave, we might expect the resulting syllable
to be in general circumflex, to represent both the original tones.
Pāṇini in fact allows this accent in every such case; and in a single
accentuated Brāhmaṇa text (ŚB.), the circumflex is regularly written.
But the language shows, on the whole, an indisposition to allow the
circumflex to rest on either long vowel or diphthong as its sole basis,
and the acute element is suffered to raise the other to its own level
of pitch, making the whole syllable acute. The only exception to
this, in most of the texts, is the combination of í and i, which becomes ī̀: thus, divī̀ 'va, from diví iva; in the Tāittirīya texts alone
such a case follows the general rule, while ú and u, instead, make
u: thus, sùdgātā from sú-udgātā.
129. The i-vowels, the u-vowels, and ft ṛ, before a
dissimilar vowel or a diphthong, are regularly converted
each into its own corresponding semivowel, TJ^y or "J^v or
r. Examples are:
~TTT~" ity āha (iti-+āha);
i-rfET-T madhv iva (madhu+-iva);
^í^pífeT duhitrarthe (duhitṛ-arthe);
teUHT stry asya (strī-+asya);
cfêf vadhvāi (vadhū-āi).
a. But in internal combination the i and u-vowels are not
seldom changed instead to iy and uv — and this especially in monosyllables, or after two consonants, where otherwise a group of consonants difficult of pronunciation would be the result. The cases
will be noticed below, in explaining inflected forms.
b. A radical i-vowel is converted into y even before i in perfect tense-inflection : so ninyima (ninī+ima).
c. In a few sporadic cases, i and u become iy and uv even in wordcomposition: e. g., triyavi (tri + avi), viyaṅga (vi + aṅga), suvita
(su + ita): compare 1204b, c.
d. Not very seldom, the same word (especially as found in different
texts of the older language) has more than one form, showing various treat-
45 VOWEL COMBINATION. [—131
ment of an i or u-vowel: e. g. svàr or súvar, tanvê or tanúve, budh¬
nyà or budhníya, rā́tryāi or rā́triyāi. For the most part, doubtless,
these are only two ways of writing the same pronunciation, sú-ar, budhní¬
a, and so on; and the discordance has no other importance, historical or
phonetic. There is more or less of this difference of treatment of an i- or
u-element after a consonant in all periods of the language.
e. In the older language, there is a marked difference, in respect
to the frequency of vowel-combination for avoiding hiatus as compared with
that of non-combination and consequent hiatus, between the class of cases
where two vowel-sounds, similar or dissimilar, would coalesce into one (126,
127) and that where an i - or u-vowel would be converted into a semivowel. Thus, in word-composition, the ratio of the cases of coalesced vowels
to those of hiatus are in RV. as five to one, in A V. as nineteen to one,
while the cases of semivowel-conversion are in RV. only one in twelve, in
AV. only one in five; in sentence-combination, the cases of coalescence
are in both RV. and AV. about as seven to one, while those of semivowelconversion are in RV. only one in fifty, in A V. one in five.
f. For certain cases of the loss or assimilation of i and u before y
and v respectively, see 233a.
130. As regards the accent —here, as in the preceding case
(128), the only combination requiring notice is that of an acute ior u-vowel with a following grave: the result is circumflex; and
such cases of circumflex are many times more frequent than any and
all others. Examples are:
Sgf?1
vyùṣṭi (ví-uṣṭi); -3U|-_|ÍH abhyàrcati;
•-T^h nadyāù (nadí-āu);
ífcjy svìṣṭa (sú-iṣṭa); rfM~^tanvàs (tanū-as).
a. Of a similar combination of acute ṛ́ with following grave, only a
single case has been noted in accented texts: namely, vijñātr êtát (i. e.
vijñātṛ́ etát: ŚB. xiv. 6. 8 -
1
) ; the accentuation is in accordance with the
rules for i and u.
131. Of a diphthong, the final i - or u-element is changed to its corresponding semivowel, or ~^v, before any
vowel or diphthong: thus, " e (really ai: 28a) becomes EFT ay,
and -5(t o (that is, au: 28a) becomes av; āi becomes
-~7T āy, and -5† āu becomes āv.
a. No change of accent, of course, occurs here; each original
syllable retains its syllabic identity, and hence also its own tone.
b. Examples can be given only for internal combination, since in
external combination there are further changes : see the next paragraph. Thus,
^ ï " naya (ne-a); ^īī-T nāya (nāi-a);
H ~ bhava (bho-a); Ht-T bhāva (bhau-a).
132—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 4 6
132. In external combination, we have the important
additional rule that the semivowel resulting from the conversion of the final element of a diphthong is in general
dropped; and the resulting hiatus is left without further
change.
133. That is to say, a final e (the most frequent
ease) becomes simply 3Sf a before an initial vowel (except
ET a: see 135, below), and both then remain unchanged;
and a final ^ ai, in like manner, becomes (everywhere)
5TT ā. Thus,
?T --īīīīrTTi ta āgatāḥ (te + āgatāḥ);
«~T nagara iha (nagare +– iha);
cTFīī M^lcl^tasmā adadāt (tasmāi+– adadāt);
í^5iMI sirhH^striyā uktam (striyāi*+ uktam).
a. The later grammarians allow the y in such combinations to be either
retained or dropped; but the uniform practice of the manuscripts, of every
age, in accordance with the strict requirement of the Vedic grammars (Prāti¬
śākhyas), is to omit the semivowel and leave the hiatus.
b. The persistence of the hiatus caused by this omission is a plain
indication of the comparatively recent loss of the intervening consonantal
sound.
c. Instances, however, of the avoidance of hiatus by combination of
the remaining final vowel with the following initial according to the usual
rules are met with in every period of the language, from the RV. down;
but they are rare and of sporadic character. Compare the similar treatment
of the hiatus after a lost final s, 176—7.
d. For the peculiar treatment of this combination in certain cases by
the MS., see below, 176d.
134. a. The diphthong o (except as phonetic alteration of
final as: see 175a) is an unusual final, appearing only in the stem
go (361 c), in the voc. sing, of u-stems (341), in words of which
the final a is combined with the particle u‚ as atho, and in a few
interjections. In the last two classes it is uncombinable (below,
138 c,fj; the vocatives sometimes retain the v and sometimes lose
it (the practices of different texts are too different to be briefly
stated); go (in composition only) does not ordinarily lose its final element, but remains gav or go. A final as becomes a, with following
hiatus, before any vowel save a (for which, see the next paragraph).
-17 VOWEL COMBINATION. [—135
b. The ~^v of SfFf^av from i t āu is usually retained:
thus,
cTTcR tāv eva (tāu + eva);
3HlfeKlií) ubhāv indrāgnī (ubhāu-+indrāgnī).
c. In the older language, however, it is in some texts dropped before an u-vowel: thus, tā́ ubhāú; in other texts it is treated like āi‚ or
loses its u-element before every initial vowel: thus, tā́ evá, ubhā́ in–
drāgnī́.
135. After final “ e or Eft o, an initial ET a disappears.
a. The resulting accent is as if the a were not dropped, but
rather absorbed into the preceding diphthong, having its tone duly
represented in the combination. If, namely, the e or o is grave or
circumflex and the a acute, the former becomes acute; if the e or
o is acute and the a grave, the former becomes circumflex, as usually in the fusion of an acute and a grave element. If both are
acute or both grave, no change, of course, is seen in the result.
Examples are:
^TvSgōp^tê -bruvan (té abruvan);
īff -"xfēfftT so 'bravīt (sáḥ abravīt);
í^fàHo-JÌ ^fīī! hiṃsitavyô 'gníḥ (hinsitavyàḥ agníḥ);
UÍ^í ï vJiM-íìrī^yád índró 'bravīt (yád índraḥ ábravīt);
UAISH H sTa-^fT yád rājanyó 'bravīt (yád rājanyàḥ
ábravīt).
b. As to the use of the avagraha sign in the case ofsuch an elision,
see above, 16. In transliteration, the reversed apostrophe, or rough breathing, will be used in this work to represent it.
c. This elision or absorption of initial a after final e or o, which
in the later language is the invariable rule, is in the Veda only an occasional occurrence. Thus, in the RV., out of nearly 4500 instances of such
an initial a, it is, as the metre shows, to be really omitted only about seventy
times; in the AV., less than 300 times out of about 1600. In neither
work is there any accordance in respect to the combination in question
between the written and spoken form of the text: in RV., the a is (as
written) elided in more than three quarters of the cases; in AV., in about
two thirds; and in both texts it is written in a number of instances where
the metre requires its omission.
d. In a few cases, an initial ā is thus elided, especially that of
ātman.
e. To the rules of vowel combination, as above stated, there
are certain exceptions. Some of the more isolated of these will be
135—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 48
noticed where they come up in the processes of inflection etc.; a
few require mention here.
136. In internal combination:
a. The augment a makes with the initial vowel of a root the
combinations āi, āu, ār (vṛddhi-vowels: 235), instead of e, o, ar
(guṇa-vowels), as required by 127: thus, āita (a + ita), āubhnāt
(a+ubhnāt), ārdhnot (a+ṛdhnot).
b. The final o of a stem (1203a) becomes av before the suffix ya
(originally ia: 1210a).
c. The final vowel of a stem is often dropped when a secondary suffix is added (1203a),
d. For the weakening and loss of radical vowels, and for certain insertions, see below, 249ff., 257—8.
137. In external combination:
a. The final a or ā of a preposition, with initial ṛ of a root,
makes ār instead of ar: Thus, ārchati (ā+ṛchati), avārchati (ava+
ṛchati), upārṣati (ŚB.: upa+ṛṣati; but AV. uparṣanti).
b. Instances are occasionally met with of a final a or a being lost
entirely before initial e or o: thus, in verb-forms, av' eṣyāmas AB.,
up' eṣatu etc. AV.; in derivatives, as upetavya, upetṛ; in compounds,
as daśoni, yathetam, and (permissibly) compounds with oṣṭha (not
rare), otu (not quotable), odana, as adharoṣṭha or adharāuṣṭha, tilo¬
dana or tilāudana; and even in sentence-combination, as iv' etayas,
aśvin' eva, yath' ociṣe (all RV.), tv' eman and tv' odman B.; and
always with the exclamation om or oṁkāra.
c. The form ūh from √vah sometimes makes the heavier or vṛddhi
(235) diphthongal combination with a preceding a-vowel: thus, prāuḍhi,
akṣāuhiṇī (from pra + ūḍhi, etc.).
138. Certain final vowels, moreover, are uncombinable
(pragṛhya), or maintain themselves unchanged before any
following vowel. Thus,
a. The vowels ī, ū, and e as dual endings, both of declensional and of conjugational forms. Thus, bandhū āsāte imāu; girī
ārohatam.
b. The pronoun amī (nom. pl.: 501); and the Vedic pronominal forms asmé, yuṣmé, tvé (492 a).
c. A final o made by combination of a final a-vowel with the particle u (1122b): thus, atho, mo, no.
d. A final ī of a Vedic locative case from an i-stem (336f).
e. A protracted final vowel (78).
f. The final, or only, vowel of an interjection, as aho‚ he, ā, i, u.
g. The older language shows occasional exceptions to these rules:
thus, a dual ī combined with a following i, as nṛpátī 'va; an a elided
after o, as átho 'si; a locative ī turned into a semivowel, as védy asyā́m.
49 PERMITTED FINALS. [—141
Permitted Finals.
139. The sounds allowed to occur as finals in Sanskrit
words standing by themselves (not in euphonic combination
with something following) are closely limited, and those
which would etymologically come to occupy such a position
are often variously altered, in general accordance with their
treatment in other circumstances, or are sometimes omitted
altogether.
a. I The variety of consonants that would ever come at the end of
either an inflected form or a derivative stem in the language is very small:
namely, in forms, only t (OT d), n, m, s;in derivative stems, only t, d,
n, r, s (and, in a few rare words, j). But almost all consonants occur as
finals of roots; and every root is liable to be found, alone or as last member of a compound, in the character of a declined stem.
140. A ll the vowel sounds, both simple and diphthongal,
may be sounded at the end of a word.
a. But neither ṛ nor 1 ever actually occurs; and ṛ is rare (only as
neuter sing, of a stem in ṛ or ar, or as final of such a stem in composition).
Thus, indra,śiváyā, ákāri, nadī́, dā́tu, camū́, janayitṛ́, ágne,
śivā́yāi, vā́yo, agnāú.
141. Of the non-nasal mutes, only the first in each
series, the non-aspirate surd, is allowed; the others — surd
aspirate, and both sonants — whenever they would etymologically occur, are converted into this.
Thus, agnimát for agnimáth, suhṛ́t forsuhṛ́d, vīrút for vīrúdh,
triṣṭúp for triṣṭúbh.
a. In a few roots, when their final (sonant aspirate) thus
loses its aspiration, the original sonant aspiration of the
initial reappears: compare eg h, below, 147.
Thus, dagh becomes dhak, budh becomes bhut, and so on.
The roots exhibiting this change are stated below, 155.
b. There was some question among the Hindu grammarians as to
whether the final mute is to be estimated as of surd or of sonant quality;
but the great weight of authority, and the invariable practice of the manuscripts, favor the surd.
142—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 5 0
142. The palatals, however, form here (as often elsewhere) an exception to the rules for the other mutes. No
palatal is allowed as final. The ~reverts (43) to its original "fi k: thus, cfTSR vāk, ^sMH ^ aùhomúk. The ch
(only quotable in the root ~ F prach) becomes Z t- thus,
*x "x
V[ĪZ prāṭ. The j either reverts to its original guttural or
becomes Z t, in accordance with its treatment in other com¬
binations (219): thus, bhiṣák, W{\t^ virāṭ. The jh
does not occur, but is by the native grammarians declared
convertible to Z ṭ.
*X
143. Of the nasals, the m and ^ n are extremely
common, especially the former m and s are of all final
consonants the most frequent); the tn ṇ is allowed, but is
quite rare; J ṅ is found (remaining after the loss of a following i k) in a very small number of words (386 b,c,
407 a): 3T ñ never occurs.
a. But the final m of a root is changed to n (compare 212 a,
below): thus, akran from kram, ágan, ajagan, aganīgan from gam,
ánān from nam, ayān from yam, praśān from śam; no other cases
are quotable.
144. Of the semivowels, the ^ 1 alone is an admitted
*x
final, and it is very rare. The ^ r is (like its nearest surd
correspondent, īī s: 145) changed as final to visarga. Of
ET y and ^ v there is no occurrence.
145. Of the sibilants, none may stand unaltered at the
end of a word. The H s (which of all final consonants
would otherwise be the commonest) is, like ^~ r, changed to
a breathing, the visarga. The 5T^ ś either reverts (43) to its
original -Sfi k, or, in some roots, is changed to ^ \ (in accordance with its changes in inflection and derivation: see
below, 218): thus, f^-fi dik, but fez viṭ. The ~ ṣ is likewise changed to Z^ṭ: thus, īīT^ prāvṛṭ.
a. The change of ṣ to ṭ is of rare occurrence: see below, 226 d.
51 PERMITTED FINALS. [—150
b. Final radical s is said by the grammarians to be changed to t;
but no sure example of the conversion is quotable: see 168; and compare 555 a.
146. The compound kṣ is prescribed to be treated
as simple "J^ s (not becoming i k by 150, below). But
the case is a rare one, and its actual treatment in the older
language irregular.
a. In the only RV. eases where the kṣ has a quasi-radical character
— namely anák from anákṣ, and ámyak from √myakṣ — the conversion is to k. Also, of forms of the s-aorist (see 890), we have adhak,
asrāk, arāik, etc. (for adhākṣ-t etc.); but also aprāṭ, ayāṭ, avāṭ, asrāṭ
(for aprākṣ-t etc.). And RV. has twice ayās from √yaj, and A V. twice
srās from √sṛj (wrongly referred by BR. to √sraṃs), both 2d sing., where
the personal ending has perhaps crowded out the root-final and tense-sign.
b. The numeral ṣaṣ six is perhaps better to be regarded as ṣakṣ,
with its kṣ treated as ṣ, according to the accepted rule.
147. The aspiration eg h is not allowed to maintain
itself, but (like xT^ j and ^ ś) either reverts to its original
guttural form, appearing as
—
' k, or is changed to Z^ ṭ —
both in accordance with its treatment in inflection: see below, 222. And, also as in inflection, the original sonant
aspiration of a few roots (given at 155b) reappears when their
final thus becomes deaspirated. Where the eg h is from
original ^ dh (228e), it becomes i?T t.
148. The visarga and anusvara are nowhere etymological finals; the former is only the substitute for an original
final H s or r; the latter occurs as final only so far as
it is a substitute for ï-f^ m (213 h).
149. Apart from the vowels, then, the usual finals,
nearly in the order of their frequency, are * ḥ, īī^ m, ^ n,
c“^t, k, q^p, ^ ṭ; those of only sporadic occurrence are
3* ṅ, ŚT 1, DJ-ŚL;
a n d , by substitution, - ṁ.
150. In general, only one consonant, of whatever kind,
is allowed to stand at the end of a word; if two or more
would etymologically occur there, the last is dropped, and
again the last, and so on, till only one remains.
150—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 5 2
a. Thus, tudants becomes tudant, and this tudan; udañc-s
becomes udaṅk (142), and this udaṅ; and achāntst (s-aor., 3d sing.,
of √ chand [890 b]) is in like manner reduced to achān.
b. But a non-nasal mute, if radical and not suffixal, is retained
after r: thus, ū́rk from urj‚ várk from √vṛj‚ avart from √vṛt, ámārṭ
from √mṛj, suhā́rt from suhārd. The case is not a common one.
c. For relics of former double finals, preserved by the later language
under the disguise of apparent euphonic combinations, see below, 207 ff.
151. Anomalous conversions of a final mute to one of another class
are occasionally met with. Examples are:
a. Of final t to k: thus, I. in a few words that have assumed a
special value as particles, as jyók, tāják (beside tāját), ṛ́dhak (beside
ṛ́dhat), pṛ́thak, drāk; and of kindred character is khādagdánt (TA.);
2. in here and there a verbal form, as sāviṣak (AV. and VS. Kāṇ.),
dambhiṣak (Āpast.), aviṣyak (Pārask.), āhalak (VS. MS.; = āharat);
3. in root-finals or the t added to root-stems (383 e), as -dhṛk for -dhṛt
(Sūtras and later) at the end of compounds, suśrúk (TB.), pṛkṣú (SV.);
and 4. we may further note here the anomalous eṅkṣva (AB.; for intsva,
√idh) and avāksam (AB.), and the feminines in knī from masculines
in ta (1176 d),
b. Of final d or t to a lingual: thus, pad in Vedic paḍbhís,
páḍgṛbhi, páḍbīśa; upānáḍbhyām (ŚB,); vy avāṭ (MS. iii. 4. 9;
√vas shine), and perhaps ápā 'rāṭ (MS.; or √raj ?).
c. Of k or j to t‚ in an isolated example or two, as samyát, ásṛt,
viśvasṛ́t (TS. K,), and prayátsu (VS. TS.; AV. -kṣu).
d. In Tāittirīya texts, of the final of anuṣṭúbh and triṣṭúbh to a
guttural: as, anuṣṭúk ca, triṣṭúgbhis, anuṣṭúgbhyas.
e. Of a labial to a dental: in kakúd for and beside kakúbh; in
saṁsṛ́dbhis (TS.) from ysṛp; and in adbhís, adbhyás, from ap or
āp (393). Excepting the first, these look like cases of dissimilation; yet
examples of the combination bbh are not very rare in the older language:
thus, kakúbbhyām, triṣṭúbbhis, kakubbhaṇḍá, anuṣṭúb bhi.
f. The forms pratidhúṣas, -ṣā (Tāittirīya texts) from pratidúh
are isolated anomalies.
152. For all the processes of external combination —
that is to say, in composition and sentence-collocation —
a stem-final or word-final is in general to be regarded as
having, not its etymological form, but that given it by the
rules as to permitted finals. From this, however, are to be
excepted the s and r: the various transformations of these
sounds have nothing to do with the visarga to which as
53 DEASPIRATION . [—155
finals before a pause they have — doubtless at a comparatively recent period of phonetic history — come to be
reduced. Words will everywhere in this work be written
with final s or r instead of ḥ; and the rules of combination
will be stated as for the two more original sounds, and not
for the visarga.
Deaspiration.
153. An aspirate mute is changed to a non-aspirate
before another non-nasal mute or before a sibilant; it stands
unaltered only before a vowel or semivowel or nasal.
a. Such a case can only arise in internal combination, since the
processes of external combination presuppose the reduction of the aspirate
to a non-aspirate surd (152).
b. Practically, also, the rules as to changes of aspirates concern
almost only the sonant aspirates, since the surd, being of later development
and rarer occurrence, are hardly ever found in situations that call for their
application.
154. Hence, if such a mute is to be doubled, it is
doubled by prefixing its own corresponding non-aspirate.
a. But in the manuscripts, both Vedic and later, an aspirate mute
is not seldom found written double — especially, if it be one of rare occurrence: for example (RV.), akhkhalī, jájhjhatī.
155. In a few roots, when a final sonant aspirate (^
gh, ^dh , --Nah; also eg h, as representing an original Ef^gh)
thus loses its aspiration, the initial sonant consonant (J^g
or ś[ d or <^b) becomes aspirate.
a. That is to say, the original initial aspirate of such roots is restored, when its presence does not interfere with the euphonic law, of comparatively recent origin, which (in Sanskrit as in Greek) forbids a root to
both begin and end with an aspirate.
b. The roots which show this peculiar change are:
in gh — dagh;
in h (for original gh) — dah, dih, duh, druh, dṛṃh, guh; and
also grah (in the later desiderative jighṛkṣa);
in dh — bandh, bādh, budh;
in bh — dabh (but only in the later desiderative dhipsa, for which
the older language has dipsa).
155—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 5 4
c. The same change appears when the law as to finals causes the
loss of the aspiration at the end of the roots see above, 141.
d. But from dah‚ duh, druh, and guh are found in the Veda
also forms without the restored initial aspirate: thus, dakṣat; adukṣat;
dudukṣa etc.;jugukṣa; mitradrúk.
e. The same analogy is followed by dadh, the abbreviated substitute ofthe present-stem dadhā, from √dhā (667), in some of the forms of
conjugation: thus, dhatthas from dadh+thas, adhatta from adadh+
ta, adhaddhvam from adadh + dhvam, etc.
f. No case is met with of the throwing back of an aspiration upon
combination with the 2d sing. impv. act. ending dhi: thus, dugdhi,
daddhi (RV.), but dhugdhvam, dhaddhvam.
Surd and Sonant Assimilation.
156. Under this head, there is especially one very marked and important difference between the internal combinations of a root or stem with suffixes and endings, and
the external combinations of stem with stem in composition
and of word with word in sentence-making: namely —
157. a. In internal combination, the initial vowel or
semivowel or nasal of an ending of inflection or derivation
exercises no altering influence upon a final consonant of the
root or stem to which it is added.
b. To this rule there are some exceptions: thus, some of the derivatives noted at 111 d; final d of a root before the participial suffix na
(957 d); and the forms noted below, 161b.
c. In external combination, on the other hand, an
initial sonant of whatever class, even a vowel or semivowel
or nasal, requires the conversion of a final surd to sonant.
d. It has been pointed out above (152) that in the rules of external
combination only admitted finals, along with s and r, need be taken
account of, all others being regarded as reduced to these before combining
with initials.
158. Final vowels, nasals, and 1 are nowhere liable
to change in the processes of surd and sonant assimilation.
a. The r‚ however, has a corresponding surd in s, to which it is
sometimes changed in external combination, under circumstances that
favor a surd utterance (178).
55 ASSIMILATION. [—161
159. With the exceptions above stated, the collision
of surd and sonant sounds is avoided in combinations —
and, regularly and usually, by assimilating the final to the
following initial, or by regressive assimilation.
Thus, in internal combination: átsi, átti, atthás, attá (√ad
+ si etc.); śagdhí, śagdhvám (√śak + dhi etc.); — in external
combination, ábhūd ayám, jyóg jīva, ṣáḍ aśītáyaḥ, triṣṭúb ápi,
dig-gaja, ṣaḍ-ahá, arcád-dhūma, bṛhád-bhānu, ab-já.
160. If, however, a final sonant aspirate of a root is
followed by rT^t or ST^th of an ending, the assimilation is in
the other direction, or progressive: the combination is made
sonant, and the aspiration of the final (lost according to 153,
above) is transferred to the initial of the ending.
Thus, gh with t or th becomes gdh; dh with the same becomes
ddh, as buddhá (√budh + ta), runddhás (√rundh + thas or tas);
bh with the same becomes bdh, as labdhá (√labh + ta), labdhvā́
(√labh + tvā).
a. Moreover, h, as representing original gh, is treated in the
same manner: thus, dugdhá, dógdhum from duh — and compare
rūḍhá and līḍhá from ruh and lih, etc, 222b.
b. In this combination, as the sonant aspiration is not lost but
transferred, the restoration of the initial aspiration (155) does not take place.
c. In dadh from √dhā (155 e), the more normal method is
followed; the dh is made surd, and the initial aspirated: thus, dhatthas,
dhattas. And RV. has dhaktam instead of dagdham from √dagh;
and TA. has inttām instead of inddhām from √idh.
161. Before a nasal in external combination, a final
mute may be simply made sonant, or it may be still further assimilated, being changed to the nasal of its own class.
Thus, either tád námas or tán námas, vā́g me or vā́ṅ me,
báḍ mahā́n or báṇ mahā́n, triṣṭúb nūnám or triṣṭúm nūnám.
a. In practice, the conversion into a nasal is almost invariably made
in the manuscripts, as, indeed, it is by the Prātiśākhyas required and not
permitted merely. Even by the general grammarians it is required in the
compound ṣáṇṇavati, and before mātrā, and the suffix maya (1225):
thus, vāṅmáya, mṛnmáya.
b. Even in internal combination, the same assimilation is made in
some of the derivatives noted at 111 d, and in the na-participles (957d).
And a few sporadic instances are met with even in verb-inflection: thus.
161—] H I . EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 56
stiṅnoti, stiùnuyāt (MS.; for stighn-), mṛnnīta (LŚS.; for mṛdn-),
jāṅmayona (KS.; for jāgm-); these, however (like the double aspirates,
154 a), are doubtless to be rejected as false readings.
162. Before I. a final t is not merely made sonant, but fully
assimilated, becoming 1: thus, tál labhate, ulluptam.
163. Before eg h (the case occurs only in external combination), a final mute is made sonant; and then the eg h
may either remain unchanged or be converted into the
sonant aspirate corresponding with the former: thus, either
cTÌ^ tád hi or rrfā" tád dhi.
a. In practice, the latter method is almost invariably followed; and
the grammarians of the Prātiśākhya period are nearly unanimous in requiring it. The phonetic difference between the two is very slight.
Examples are: vā́g ghutáḥ, ṣáḍḍhotā (ṣaṭ + hotā), taddhita
(tat + hita), anuṣṭúb bhí.
Combinations of final ^ s and J r.
164. The euphonic changes of īī^s and r are best
considered together, because of the practical relation of
the two sounds, in composition and sentence-collocation,
as corresponding surd and sonant: in a host of cases īī s
becomes ^ r in situations requiring or favoring the occurrence of a sonant; and, much less often, ^ r becomes īī^ s
where a surd is required.
a. In internal combination, the two are far less exchangeable
with one another: and this class of cases may best be taken up first.
165. Final r radical or quasi-radical (that is, not belonging to
an ending of derivation) remains unchanged before both surd and sonant
sounds, and even before su in declension: thus, píparṣi, caturthá,
catúrṣu, pūrṣú.
166. Final radical s remains before a surd in general, and usually before s, as in śā́ssi, śāssva, āsse, āśī́ṣṣu (the last is also
written āśī́ḥṣu: 172): but it is lost in ási (√as + si: 636). Before
a sonant (thatis, bh) in declension, it is treated as in external combination : thus, āśī́rbhis. Before a sonant (thatis, dh) in conjugation,
it appears to be dropped, at least after long ā: thus, śādhi, śaśādhi,
cakādhi (the only quotable cases); in edhí (√as + dhi: 636) the
root syllable is irregularly altered; but in 2d perss. pi., made with
dhvam, as ādhvam, śādhvam, arādhvam (881 a), vadhvam (√vas
5 7 FINAL S AND r. [--189
clothe), it is, on account of the equivalence and interchangeability of
dhv and ddhv (232), impossible to say whether the s is omitted or
converted into d.
a. Final radical s is very rare; RV. (twice, both 2d pers. sing.)
treats ághas from √ghas in the same manner as any ordinary word ending in as.
b. For certain cases of irregular loss of the s of a root or tensestem, see 233 b—e.
167. In a very few cases, final radical s before s is changed to
t (perhaps by dissimilation): they are, from √vas dwell (also sporadically from vas shine, ŚB., and vas clothe, Har.), the future vatsyā́mi
and aorist ávātsam; from √ghas, the desiderative stem jighatsa.
a. For t as apparent ending of the 3d sing, in s-verbs, see 555 a.
168. According to the grammarians, the final s of certain other
roots, used as noun-stems, becomes t at the end of the word, and before
bh and su: thus, dhvat, dhvadbhis, sradbhyas,sratsu. But genuine
examples of such change are not quotable.
a. Sporadic cases of a like conversion are found in the Veda: namely,
mādbhís and mādbhyás from mā́s; uṣádbhis from uṣás; svátavad¬
bhyas from svátavas; svávadbhis etc. (not quotable) from svávas.
But the actuality of the conversion here is open to grave doubt; it rather
seems the substitution of a t-stem for a s-stem. The same is true of the
change of vāṃs to vat in the declension of perfect participles (458).
The stem anaḍvah (404), from anas-vah, is anomalous and isolated.
b. In the compounds ducchúnā (dus-śunā) and párucchepa
(parus-śepa), the final s of the first member is treated as if a t (203).
169. Asthe final consonant of derivative stems and of inflected
forms, both of declension and of conjugation, s is extremely frequent;
and its changes form a subject of first-rate importance in Sanskrit
euphony. The r, on the other hand, is quite rare.
a. The r is found as original final in certain case-forms of stems in
ṛ or ar (369 ff.); in root-stems in ir and ur from roots in ṛ (383 b);
in a small number of other stems, as svàr, áhar and ū́dhar (beside
áhon and ū́dhan: 430), dvā́r or dur, and the Vedic vádhar, uṣar-,
vasar-, vanar-, śrutar-, sapar-, sabar-, athar- (cf. 176 c); in a
few particles, as antár, prātár, púnar; and in the numeral catúr
(482 g),
b. The euphonic treatment of s and r yielding precisely the same
result after all vowels except a and ā, there are certain forms with regard
to which it is uncertain whether they end in s or r, and opinions differ
respecting them. Such are ur (or us) of the gen.-abl. sing, of ṛ-stems
(371 c), and us (or ur) of the 3d plur. of verbs (550 c).
170---] III . EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 58
170. a. The īī^s, as already noticed (145), becomes
visarga before a pause.
b. It is retained unchanged only when followed by
rT t or ST th, the surd mutes of its own class.
c. Before the palatal and lingual surd mutes — TT C
and |T ch, ^ ṭ and 5" ṭh — it is assimilated, becoming the
sibilant of either class respectively, namely 5J^ ś or ṣ.
d. Before the guttural and labial surd mutes — 5R k
and ïlkh , ^ p and -īī ph — it is also theoretically assimilated, becoming respectively the jihvāmūlīya and upadhmā¬
nīya spirants (69); but in practice these breathings are
unknown, and the conversion is to visarga.
Examples are: to b. tatas te, cakṣus te ; to c. tataś ca, ta¬
syāś chāyā; pādaṣ ṭalati; to d. nalaḥ kāmam, puruṣaḥ khanati;
yaśaḥ prāpa, vṛkṣaḥ phalavān.
171. The first three of these rules are almost universal; to the
last one there are numerous exceptions, the sibilant being retained (or,
by 180, converted into ṣ), especially in compounds; but also, in the
Veda, even in sentence combination.
a. In the Veda, the retention of the sibilant in compounds is the
general rule, the exceptions to which are detailed in the Vedic grammars.
b. In the later language, the retention is mainly determined by the
intimacy or the antiquity and frequency of the combination. Thus, the
final sibilant of a preposition or a word filling the office of a preposition
before a verbal root is wont to be preserved; and that of a stem before a
derivative of √kṛ, before pati, before kalpa and kāma, and so on.
Examples are namaskāra, vācaspati, āyuṣkāma, payaskalpa.
c. The Vedic retention of the sibilant in sentence-collocation is detailed in full in the Prātiśākhyas. The chief classes of cases are: 1. the
final of a preposition or its like before a verbal form; 2. of a genitive
before a governing noun: as divás putráḥ, iḍás padé; 3. of an ablative before pari: as himávatas pari; 4. of other less classifiable cases:
as dyāúṣ pitā́, tríṣ pūtvā́, yás pátiḥ, paridhíṣ pátāti, etc.
172. Before an initial sibilant — 3T ś, ~ ṣ, īī s — īīs
is either assimilated, becoming the same sibilant, or it is
changed into visarga.
a. The native grammarians are in some measure at variance (see
APr. Ü. 40, note) as to which of these changes should be made, and in
59 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL s. [-175
part they allow either at pleasure. The usage of the manuscripts is also
discordant; the conversion to visarga is the prevalent practice, though
the sibilant is also not infrequently found written, especially in SouthIndian manuscripts. European editors generally write visarga; but the
later dictionaries and glossaries generally make the alphabetic place of a
word the same as if the sibilant were read instead.
Examples are: manuh svayam or manus svayam; indraḥ
śūraḥ or indraś śūraḥ; tāḥ ṣaṭ or tāṣ ṣaṭ.
173. There are one or two exceptions to these rules:
a* If the initial sibilant has a surd mute after it, the final s may be
dropped altogether — and by some authorities is required to be so dropped. Thus, vāyava stha or vāyavaḥ stha; catustanām or catuḥ¬
stanām. With regard to this point the usage of the different manuscripts
and editions is greatly at variance.
b. Before ts, the s is allowed to become visarga, instead of being
retained.
174. Before a sonant, either vowel or consonant (except r: see 179), H^s is changed to the sonant ^ r —
unless, indeed, it be preceded by 5| a or ~ ā.
Examples are : devapatir iva, śrīr iva; manur gacchati, tanūr
apsu; svasṛr ajanayat; tayor adṛṣṭakāmaḥ; sarvāir guṇāih; agner
manve.
a. For a few cases like dūḍāśa, dūṇāśa, see below, 199d.
b. The exclamation bhos (456) loses its s before vowels and sonant
consonants: thus, bho nāiṣadha (and the s is sometimes found omitted
also before surds).
e. The endings ETīī^as and -3TīīJ-s (both of which are extremely common) follow rules of their own, namely:
175. a. Final -TO as, before any sonant consonant and
before short % a, is changed to -fl o — and the ET a after
it is lost.
b. The resulting accentuation, and the fact that the loss of a is
only occasional in the older language of the Veda, have been pointed out
above, 135 a, c.
Examples are: nalo nāma, brahmaṇyo vedavit; manobhava;
hantavyo 'smi; anyonya (anyas + anya), yaśortham (yaśas +
artham).
c. Final -TO^as before any other vowel than % a loses
its Hj3, becoming simple a; and the hiatus thus occasioned remains.
175—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 6 0
d. That is to say, the o from as is treated as an original e is treated in the same situation: see 132—3.
Examples are: bṛhadaśva uvāca, āditya iva, námaükti, vásyaïṣṭi.
176. Exceptions to the rules as to final as are:
a. The nominative masculine pronouns sás and eṣás and (Vedic)
syás (495a, 499a,b) lose their s before any consonant: thus, sa
dadarśa he saw, eṣa puruṣaḥ this man; but so 'bravīt he said, puruṣa
eṣaḥ.
b. Instances are met with, both in the earlier and in the later language, of effacement of the hiatus after alteration of as, by combination
of the remaining final a with the following initial vowel: thus, tato
'vāca (tatas + uvāca), payoṣṇī (payas,+ uṣṇī), adhāsana (adhas +
āsana): compare 133 c, 177 b. In the Veda, such a combination is
sometimes shown by the metre to be required, though the written text
has the hiatus. But sa in RV. is in the great majority of cases combined
with the following vowel: e. g., sé'd for sá id, sā́ 'smāi for sá asmāi,
sāú 'ṣadhīḥ for sá óṣadhīḥ; and similar examples are found also in
the other Vedic texts.
c. Other sporadic irregularities in the treatment of final as occur.
Thus, it is changed to ar instead of o once in RV. in avás, once in
SV. in ávas (RV. ávo), once in MS. in dambhiṣas; in bhuvas (second
of the trio of sacred utterances bhūs, bhuvas, svar), except in its earliest occurrences; in a series of words in a Brāhmaṇa passage (TS. K.),
viz. jinvár, ugrár, bhīmár, tveṣár, śrutár, bhūtár, and (K.only)
pūtár; in janar and mohar; and some of the ar-stems noted at 169 a
are perhaps of kindred character. On the other hand, as is several times
changed to o in RV. before a surd consonant; and sás twice, and yás
once, retains its final sibilant in a like position.
d. In MS., the final a left before hiatus by alteration of either as
(o) or e (133) is made long if itself unaccented and if the following initial vowel is accented: thus, sū́rā éti (from sū́ras + éti), nirupyátā
índrāya (from -yáte+índ-), and also kārya éka- (from kāryàs, because
virtually kārías); but ādityá índraḥ (from ādityás+índraḥ), etá ítare
(from eté+ítare),
177. Final --3TīīJLs before any sonant, whether vowel or
consonant, loses its īī^ s, becoming simple ETT ā; and a
hiatus thus occasioned remains.
a. The maintenance of the hiatus in these cases, as in that of o and
e and āi (above, 133—4), seems to indicate a recent loss of the intermediate sound. Opinions are divided as to what this should have been.
Some of the native grammarians assimilate the case of ās to that of āi,
61 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL r. [—180
assuming the conversion to āy in both alike — but probably only as a
matter of formal convenience in rule-making.
b. Here, too (as in the similar cases of e and āi and o: 133c‚
176 b), there are examples to be found, both earlier and later, of efface¬
ment of the hiatus.
178. Fina l r‚ in general, shows the same form which
H^s would show under the same conditions.
a. Thus, it becomes visarga when final, and a sibilant or visarga
before an initial surd mute or sibilant (170): thus, rudatī punaḥ,
dvās tat, svàś ca, catúścatvāriṃśat; and (111c, d) prātastána, an¬
tastya, catuṣṭaya, dhūstva; prātaḥ karoti, antaḥpāta.
b. But original final r preceded by a or ā maintains itself unchanged before a sonant: thus, punar eti, prātarjit, ákar jyótiḥ,
áhār dā́mnā, vārdhi.
c. The r is preserved unchanged even before a surd in a number of
Vedic compounds: thus, aharpáti; svàrcanas, svàrcakṣas, svàrpati,
svarṣā́, svàrṣāti; dhūrṣád, dhūrṣah; pū́rpati, vārkāryá, āśī́rpada,
punartta; and in some of these the r is optionally retained in the later
language. The RV. also has āvar támaḥ once in sentence-combination.
d. On the other hand, final ar of the verb-form āvar is changed to
o before a sonant in several cases in RV. And r is lost, like s, in one
or two cases in the same text: thus, akṣā índuḥ, áha evá.
179. A double r is nowhere admitted: ifsuch would occur, either
by retention of an original r or by conversion of s to r, one r is
omitted, and the preceding vowel, if short, is made long by compensation.
Thus, punā ramate, nṛpatī rājati, mātū́ rihán, jyotīratha,
dūrohaṇá.
a. In some Vedic texts, however, there are instances of ar changed to
o before initial r: thus, svô rohāva.
Conversion of s to “ ṣ.
180. The dental sibilant s is changed to the lingual
~^ṣ, if immediately preceded by any vowel save a and
EfT ā, or by -īī k or r — unless the H^s be final, or followed by r.
a. The assimilating influence of the preceding lingual vowels and
semivowel is obvious enough; that of k and the other vowels appears to
be due to a somewhat retracted position of the tongue in the mouth during
180–] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 62
their utterance, causing its tip to reach the roof of the mouth more easily
at a point further back than the dental one.
b. The general Hindu grammar prescribes the same change after a 1
also; but the Prātiśākhyas give no such rule, and phonetic considerations,
the 1 being a dental sound, are absolutely against it. Actual cases of the
combination do not occur in the older language, nor have any been pointed out in the later.
c. The vowels that cause the alteration of s to ṣ may be called
for brevity's sake "alterant" vowels.
181. Hence, in the interior of a Sanskrit word, the dental s is
not usually found after any vowel save a and ā‚ but, instead of it,
the lingual ṣ. But —
a. A following r prevents the conversion: thus, usra, tisras,
tamisra. And it is but seldom made in the forms and derivatives of
a root containing an r-element (whether r or ṛ), whatever the position
of that element: thus, sisarti, sisṛtam, sarīsṛpá, tistire, parisrút.
To this rule there are a few exceptions, as viṣṭír, viṣṭārá, níṣṭṛta,
víṣpardhas, gáviṣṭhira, etc. In ajuṣran the final ṣ of a root is preserved even immediately before r.
b. This dissimilating influence of a following r, as compared with
the invariable assimilating influence of a preceding r, is peculiar and problematical.
c The recurrence of ṣ in successive syllables is sometimes avoided
by leaving the former s unchanged: thus, sisakṣi, but siṣakti; yāsisīṣ–
ṭhās, but yāsiṣīmahi. Similarly, in certain desiderative formations: see
below, 184e.
d. Other cases are sporadic: RV. has the forms sisice and sisicus
(but siṣicatus), and the stems ṛbī́sa, kīstá, bísa, busá, bṛ́saya; a
single root pis, with its derivative pesuka, is found once in ŚB.; MS.
has mṛsmṛṣā́; músala begins to be found in AV.; and such cases
grow more numerous; for puṁs and the roots niṃs and hiṃs, see below,
183 a.
182. On the other hand (as was pointed out above, 62), the
occurrence of ṣ in Sanskrit words is nearly limited to cases falling
under this rule: others are rather sporadic anomalies — except where
ṣ is the product of ś or kṣ before a dental, as in draṣṭum, caṣṭe,
tvaṣṭar: see 218, 221. Thus, wefind—
a. Four roots, kaṣ, laṣ, bhaṣ, bhāṣ, of which the last is common
and is found as early as the Brāhmaṇas.
b. Further, in RV., áṣa, kaváṣa, caṣā́la, cā́ṣa, jálāṣa, pāṣyà,
baṣkáya, váṣaṭ (for vakṣat?), kā́ṣṭhā; and, by anomalous alteration
of original s, -ṣāh (turāṣā́h etc.), áṣāḍha, upaṣṭút, and probably
apāṣṭhá and aṣṭhīvánt. Such cases grow more common later.
c. The numeral ṣaṣ, as already noted (146 b), is more probably ṣakṣ.
63 CONVERSION OF S TO ṣ. [—185
183. The nasalization of the alterant vowel — or, in other words,
its being followed by anusvara — does not prevent its altering effect
upon the sibilant: thus, havīṃṣi, parūṃṣi. And the alteration takes
place in the initial s of an ending after the final s of a stem, whether
the latter be regarded as also changed to ṣ or as converted into v isarga: thus, haviṣṣu or haviḥṣu, paruṣṣu or paruḥṣu.
a. But the s of puṁs (394) remains unchanged, apparently on
account of the retained sense of its value as pums; also that of √hiṃs,
because of its value as hins (hinasti etc.); √niṃs (RV. only) is more
questionable.
184. The principal cases of alteration of s in internal combination are these:
a. In endings, inflectional or derivative, beginning with s — thus,
su; si, se, sva; s of sibilant-aorist, future, and desiderative; suffixes
sna‚ snu, sya, etc. —after a final alterant vowel or consonant of root
or stem, or a union-vowel: thus, juhoṣi, śeṣe, anāiṣam, bhaviṣyāmi,
śuśrūṣe, deṣṇa, jiṣṇu, vikṣu, akārṣam.
b. The final s of a stem before an ending or suffix: thus, haviṣā,
haviṣas, etc., from havis; śakṣuṣmant, śociṣka, mānuṣa, manuṣya,
jyotiṣṭva.
c. Roots having a final sibilant (except ś) after an alterant vowel
are — with the exception offictitiousones and pis, niṃs, hiṃs — regarded as ending in ṣ, not s; and concerning the treatment of this ṣ in combination, see below, 225—6.
d. The initial s of a root after a reduplication: thus, siṣyade,
suṣvāpa, siṣāsati, coṣkūyate, saniṣvaṇat.
e. Excepted is in general an initial radical s in a desiderative stem,
when the desiderative-sign becomes ṣ: thus, sisīrṣati from √sṛ, sisaṅk¬
ṣati from √sañj. And there are other scattering cases, as tresus (perf.
from √tras), etc.
185. But the same change occurs also, on a considerable scale,
in external combination, especially in composition. Thus:
a. Both in verbal forms and in derivatives, the final i or u of a
preposition or other like prefix ordinarily lingualizes the initial s of
the root to which it is prefixed; since such combinations are both of
great frequency and of peculiar intimacy, analogous with those of root
or stem and affix: thus, abhiṣā́c, pratiṣṭhā́, níṣikta, víṣita; anu¬
ṣvadhám, suṣéka; the cases are numberless.
b. The principal exceptions are in accordance with the principles
already laid down: namely, when the root contains an r-element, and when
a recurrence of the sibilant would take place. But there are also others,
of a more irregular character; and the complete account of the treatment
of initial radical s after a prefix would be a matter of great detail, and
not worth giving here.
185—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 64
C. Not infrequently, the initial s‚ usually altered after a certain
prefix, retains the altered sibilant even after an interposed a of augment
or reduplication: thus, aty aṣṭhāt, abhy aṣṭhām, pary aṣasvajat, vy
aṣahanta, ny aṣadāma, nir aṣṭhāpayan, abhy aṣiñcan, vy aṣṭabh¬
nāt; vi taṣṭhe, vi taṣṭhire.
d. Much more anomalous is the occasional alteration of initial radical s after an a-element of a prefix. Such cases are ava ṣṭambh (against
ni stambh and prati stambh) and (according to the grammarians) ava
ṣvan.
186. In other compounds, the final alterant vowel of the first
member not infrequently (especially in the Veda) lingualizes the initial s of the second: for example, yudhiṣṭhira, pitṛṣvasṛ, goṣṭhá,
agniṣṭomá, anuṣṭúbh, tríṣaṁdhi, diviṣád, parameṣṭhín, abhiṣená,
pitṛṣád, puruṣṭutá.
a. A very few cases occur of the same alteration after an a-element:
thus, saṣṭúbh, avaṣṭambha, savyaṣṭhā́, apāṣṭhá, upaṣṭút; also
√sah, when its final, by 147, becomes ṭ: thus, satrāṣā́ṭ (but satrā¬
sā́ham),
187. The final s of the first member of a compound often becomes ṣ after an alterant vowel: thus, the s of a prepositional prefix,
as niṣṣídhvan, duṣṭára (for duṣṣṭára), āvíṣkṛta; and, regularly, a
s retained instead of being converted to visarga before a labial or
guttural mute (171a), as haviṣpā́, jyotiṣkṛ́t; tapuṣpā́.
188. Once more, in the Veda, the same alteration, both of an initial
and of a final s‚ is not infrequent even between the words composing a
sentence. The cases are detailed in the Prātiśākhya belonging to each text,
and are of very various character. Thus:
a. The initial s, especially of particles: as ū ṣú, hi ṣma, k am u
ṣvít; — also of pronouns: as hi ṣáḥ; — of verb-forms, especially from
√as: as hi ṣṭhá, diví ṣṭha; — and in otherscattering cases: as u ṣṭuhi,
nū́ ṣṭhiràm, trī́ ṣadhásthā, ádhi ṣṇóḥ, nákiḥ ṣáḥ, yájuḥ ṣkannàm,
agníḥ ṣṭave.
b. A final s, oftenest before pronouns (especially toneless ones): as
agníṣ ṭvā, níṣ ṭe, īyúṣ ṭé, śúciṣ ṭvám, sádhiṣ ṭáva; — but also in
other cases, and wherever a final s is preserved, instead of being turned
into visarga, before a guttural or labial (171): as tríṣ pūtvā́, ā́yuṣ
kṛṇotu, vā́stoṣ pátiḥ, dyāúṣ pitā́, víbhiṣ pátāt.
Conversion of ^ n to m ṇ.
189. The dental nasal ^ n , when immediately followed
by a vowel or by or or "tfjy or s^v, is turned into the lingual līī ṇ if preceded in the same word by the
65 CONVERSION OF n TO ṇ. [—191
lingual sibilant or semivowel or vowels — that is to say,
by ~ r, or ft ṛ or ^ ṛ —: and this, not only if the
altering letter stands immediately before the nasal, but at
whatever distance from the latter it may be found: unless,
indeed, there intervene (a consonant moving the front of
the tongue: namely) a palatal (except ET^y), a lingual, or a
dental.
a. We may thus figure to ourselves the rationale of the process:
in the marked proclivity of the language toward lingual utterance, especially
of the nasal, the tip of the tongue, when once reverted into the loose lingual position by the utterance of a non-contact lingual element, tends to
hang there and make its next nasal contact in that position; and does so,
unless the proclivity is satisfied by the utterance of a lingual mute, or the
organ is thrown out of adjustment by the utterance of an element which
causes it to assume a different posture. This is not the case with the gutturals or labials, which do not move the front part of the tongue (and, as the
influence of k on following s shows, the guttural position favors the succession of a lingual): and the y is too weakly palatal to interfere with the
alteration (as its next relative, the i-vowel, itself lingualizes a s).
b. This is a rule of constant application; and (as was pointed
out above, 46) the great majority of occurrences of ṇ in the language
are the result of it.
190. The rule has force especially —
a. When suffixes, of inflection or derivation, are added to roots or
stems containing one of the altering sounds: thus, rudréṇa, rudrā́ṇām,
vā́riṇe, vā́riṇī, vā́rīṇi, dātṛṇi, hárāṇi, dvéṣāṇi, krīṇā́mi, śṛṇóti,
kṣubhāṇá, ghṛṇá, kárṇa, vṛkṇá, rugṇá, dráviṇa, iṣáṇi, purāṇá,
rékṇas, càkṣaṇa, cíkīrsamāṇa, kṛ́pamāṇa.
b. When the final n of a root or stem comes to be followed, in inflection or derivation, by such sounds as allow it to feel the effect of a preceding altering cause: thus, from √ran, ráṇanti, ráṇyati, rāraṇa,
arāṇiṣus; from brahman, bráhmaṇā, bráhmāṇi, brāhmaṇá, brah¬
maṇyà, bráhmaṇvant.
c The form piṇak (RV.: 2d and 3d sing, impf.), from √piṣ, is
wholly anomalous.
191. Thisrule (like that for the change of s to ṣ) applies strictly
and especially when the nasal and the cause of its alteration both lie
within the limits of the same integral word; but (also like the other)
it is extended, within certain limits, to compound words — and even,
in the Veda, to contiguous words in the sentence.
192–] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 66
192. Especially, a preposition or similar prefix to a root, if it
contain r or end in euphonic r for s (174), very often lingualizesthe
n of a root or of its derived stems and forms. Thus:
a. The initial n of a root is usually and regularly so altered, in all
forms and derivatives, after parā, pari, pra, nir (for nis), antar, dur
(for dus): thus, párā ṇaya, pari ṇīyate, prá ṇudasva; parāṇutti,
pariṇāma, praṇavá, nirṇíj, durṇáśa. Roots suffering this change are
written with initial ṇ in the native root-lists. The only exceptions of importance are nṛt, nabh, nand, and naś when its ś becomes ṣ (as in
pránaṣṭa).
b. The final n of a root is lingualized in some of the forms of an
and nan: thus, prā́ 'ṇiti, prāṇá, prá haṇyate, praháṇana.
c. The class-signs nu and nā are altered after the roots hi and ml:
thus, pari hiṇomi, prá miṇanti (but the latter not in the Veda).
d. The 1st sing. impv. ending āni is sometimes altered: thus, prá
bhavām.
e. Derivatives by suffixes containing n sometimes have ṇ by influence
of a preposition: thus, prayā́ṇa.
f. The n of the preposition ni is sometimes altered, like the initial
of a root, after another preposition: thus, praṇipāta, praṇidhi.
193. In compound words, an altering cause in one member sometimes
lingualizes a n of the next following member — either its initial or final
n, or n in its inflectional or derivative ending. The exercise of the altering
influence can be seen to depend in paTt upon the closeness or frequency
of the compound, or its integration by being made the base of a derivative.
Examples are: grāmaṇī́, triṇāman, urūṇasá; vṛtraháṇam etc. (but
vṛtraghnā́ etc.: 195a), nṛmáṇas, drughaṇá; pravā́haṇa, nṛpā́ṇa,
pūryā́ṇa, pitṛyā́ṇa; svargéṇa, durgā́ṇi, usráyāmṇe, tryaṅgā́ṇām.
194. Finally, in the Veda, a n (usually initial) is occasionally lingualized even by an altering sound in another word. The toneless pronouns
nas and ena- are oftenest thus affected: thus, pari ṇas, prāí 'nan, indra
eṇam; but also the particle ná like: thus, vā́r ṇá; and a few other
cases, as vā́r ṇā́ma, púnar ṇayāmasi, ognér áveṇa. More anomalous,
and perhaps to be rejected as false readings, are such as trī́ṇ imā́n and
akṣā́ṇ áva and suhā́rṇ ṇaḥ (MS.), and vyṛṣaṇ vā (Āpast.).
195. a. The immediate combination of a n with a preceding guttural
or labial seems in some cases to hinder the conversion to ṇ:thus, vṛtraghnā́
etc., kṣubhnāti, tṛpnoti (but in Veda tṛpṇu), kṣepnú, suṣumná.
b. The RV. hasthe exceptions úṣṭrānām and rāṣṭrā́nām.
Conversion of dental mutes to linguals and palatals.
196. When a dental mute comes in contact with a
lingual or palatal mute or sibilant, the dental is usually
assimilated, becoming lingual or palatal respectively.
67 DENTAL MUTES TO LlNGUALS AND PALATALS. [—199
The cases are the following:
197. A dental surd mute or nasal, or the dental sibilant, when
immediately preceded by a ṣ, is everywhere converted into the corresponding lingual.
a. Under this rule, the combinations ṣṭ‚ ṣṭh, and ṣṇ are very common; ṣṣ is rarely so written, the visarga being put instead of the former
sibilant (172): thus, jyótiḥṣu instead of jyótiṣṣu.
b. Much less often, dh is changed to ḍh after final s of a root or
tense-stem, with loss of the ṣ or its conversion to ḍ: see 226 c.
c. Those cases in which final a becomes ṭ before su (e. g. dviṭsú:
226 b) do not, of course, fall under this rule.
198. In the other (comparatively infrequent) cases where a dental
is preceded by a lingual in internal combination, the dental (except of
su loc. pi.) becomes lingual. Thus:
a. A n following immediately a ṇ made such by the rule given at
189, above — or, as it may be expressed, a double as well as a
single n — is subject to the lingualization: thus, the participles arṇṇá,
kṣuṇṇa, kṣviṇṇa, chṛṇṇá, tṛṇṇá; and, after prefixes (185 a), niṣaṇṇa,
pariviṇṇa, viṣaṇṇa, víṣyaṇṇa. But TS. has ádhiṣkanna, and RV.
yájuḥ skannám.
b. Only a very few other instances occur: ī́ṭṭe and ā́iṭṭa from √īḍ;
ṣaḍḍhā́ (also ṣaḍdhā́ and ṣoḍhā́), and ṣaṇṇā́m (ṣaṣ+nām: anomalous
gen. pi. of sas: 488). A small number of words follow the same rule in
external combination: see below, 199.
c. But tāḍhi (Vedic: √taḍ+dhi) shows loss of the final lingual
after assimilation of the dental, and compensatory lengthening.
d. Some of the cases of abnormal occurrence of ḍ are explained in a
similar way, as results of a lingualized and afterward omitted sibilant before
d: thus nīḍá from nisda, √pīḍ from pisd, √mṛḍ from mṛsd. For
words exhibiting a like change in composition, see below, 199 c.
199. In external combination —
a. A final t is directed to be assimilated to an initial lingual mute:
thus, taṭ-ṭīkā, taḍ ḍayate, taṭ-ṭhālinī, taḍ ḍhāukate: but the case
never occurs in the older language, and very rarely in the later. For final
n before a lingual, see 205 b.
b. An initial dental after a final lingual usually remains unchanged; and su of the loc pi. follows the same rule: thus, ṣáṭtriṃ¬
śat‚ ā́naḍ diváḥ, ekarā́ṭ tvám; ṣaṭsú, rāṭsú.
0. Exceptions are: a few compounds with ṣaṣ six showing double ṇ
(198 b): namely, ṣáṇṇavati, ṣaṇṇābhi (and one or two others not
quotable); and IB. has ṣaṇ ṇiramimīta.
d. In a few compounds, moreover, there appears a lingualized dental,
with compensatory lengthening, after a lost lingual sibilant or its represen-
199—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 68
tative : namely, in certain Vedic compounds with dus: dūḍábha, dūḍā́ś,
dūḍhī́, dūṇáśa, dūṇā́śa (compare the anomalous puroḍā́ś and -ḍā́śa:
puras+√dāś); and, in the language of every period, certain compounds
of ṣaṣ, with change of its vowel to an alterant quality (as in voḍhum
and soḍhum: 224b):ṣóḍaśa, ṣoḍhā́ (also ṣaḍḍhā́ and ṣaḍdhā́), ṣoḍant.
e. Between final ṭ and initial s, the insertion of a t is permitted —
or, according to some authorities, required: thus, ṣáṭ sahásrāḥ or ṣáṭt
sahásrāḥ.
200. The cases of assimilation of a dental to a contiguous
palatal occur almost only in external combination, and before an
initial palatal. There is but one case of internal combination, namely :
201. A ^ n coming to follow a palatal mute in internaThus, yācñā́ (the only instance after c), yajñá, jajñé, ajñata,
rā́jñā, rā́jm.
202. a. A final rT^t before an initial palatal mute is assimilated to it, becoming before "T^c or ^ ch, and
before xTJ jh does not occur).
Thus, uc carati, etac chattram, vidyuj jāyate; yātayájjana,
vidyujjihva, bṛhácchandas, saccarita.
b. A final ^ n is assimilated before si j , becoming 3T ñ.
c. A l l the grammarians, of every period, require this assimilation of
n to j ; but it is more often neglected, or only occasionally made, in the
manuscripts.
d. For n before a surd palatal, see below, 208.
203. Before the palatal sibilant 5T^ś, both rT t and *T n
are assimilated, becoming respectively rj^c and 3Hí; and
then the following may be, and in practice almost
always is, converted to ~" ch.
Thus, vedavic chūraḥ (-vit śū-), tac chrutvā, hṛcchaya (hṛt
+ śaya); bṛhañ cheṣaḥ or śeṣaḥ, svapañ chete or śete.
a. Some authorities regard the conversion of ś to ch after t or n as
everywhere obligatory, others as only optional; some except, peremptoiily
or optionally, a ś followed by a mute. And some require the same conversion after every mute save m, reading also vípāṭ chutudrī, anaṭ
chúci, anuṣṭup chāradī, śuk chuci. The manuscripts generally write
ch, instead of cch, as result of the combination of t and ś.
b. In the MS., t und ś are anomalously combined into ñ ś: e. g.
táñ śatám, etāvañśás.
6 9 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL n. [—207
Combinations of final ^ n.
204. Final radical n is assimilated in internal combination to a
following sibilant, becoming anusvāra.
Thus, váṃsi, váṃsva, váṃsat, maṃsyáte, jíghāṃsati.
a. According to the grammarians, it is treated before bh and su in
declension as in external combination. But the cases are, at best, excessively rare, and RV. has ráṃsu and váṃsu (the only Vedic examples).
b. Final n of a derivative suffix is regularly and usually dropped
before a consonant in inflection and composition — in composition, even
before a vowel; and a radical n occasionally follows the same rule: see
421a, 439, 1203 c, 637.
c. For assimilation of n to a preceding palatal, see 201.
The remaining cases are those of external combination.
205. a. The assimilation of n in external combination to a following sonant palatal and the palatal sibilant ś have been already treated
(202 b, 203).
b. The n is also declared to be assimilated (becoming ṇ) before a sonant lingual (ḍ, ḍh, ṇ), but the case rarely if ever occurs.
206. A n is also assimilated to a following initial I. becoming
(like m: 213 d) a nasal I.
a. The manuscripts to a great extent disregard this rule, leaving the
n unchanged; but also they in part attempt to follow it — and that, either
by writing the assimilated n (as the assimilated m, 213f, and just as
reasonably) with the anusvāra-sign, or else by doubling the 1 and putting a sign of nasality above; the latter, however, is inexact, and a better
way would be to separate the two Is, writing the first with virāma and
a nasal sign above. Thus (from trīn lokān):
manuscripts ^RT - H or "^fll-ftM ; better *^TJ§[ tfīī"R.
The second of these methods is the one oftenest followed in printed texts.
207. Before the lingual and dental sibilants, ṣ and s, final n
remains unchanged; but a t may also be inserted between the nasal
and the sibilant: thus, tā́n ṣáṭ or tā́nt ṣáṭ; mahā́n sán or ma¬
hā́nt sán.
a. According to most of the grammarians of the Prātiśākhyas (not
RPr.), the insertion of the t in such cases is a necessary one. In the
manuscripts it is very frequently made, but not uniformly. It is probably
a purely phonetic phenomenon, a transition-sound to ease the double change
of sonant to surd and nasal to non-nasal utterance — although the not
infrequent cases in which final n stands for original nt (as bharan, abha¬
ran, agnimān) may have aided to establish it as a rule. Its analogy
with the conversion of n ś into ñch (203) is palpable.
208—] III EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 70
208. Before the surd palatal, lingual, and dental mutes, there is
inserted after final n a sibilant of each of those classes respectively,
before which the n becomes anusvara: thus, devāṃś ca, bhavāṃś chi¬
dyate, kumārāṃs trīn, abharaṃs tataḥ, dadhaṃś (425 c) carum.
a. This rule, which in the classical language has established itself in
the form here given, as a phonetic rule of unvarying application, really
involves a historic survival. The large majority of cases of final n in the
language (not far from three quarters) are for original ns; and the retention of the sibilant in such cases, when once its historical ground had been
forgotten, was extended by analogy to all others,
b. Practically, the rule applies only to n before c and t‚ since cases
involving the other initials occur either not at all, or only with extreme
rarity (the Veda does not present an example of any of them). In the
Veda, the insertion is not always made, and the different texts have with
regard to it different usages, which are fully explained in their Prātiśākh¬
yas; in general, it is less frequent in the older texts. When the ś does not
appear between n and c, the n is of course assimilated, becoming ñ (203).
209. The same retention of original final s after a nasal, and
consequent treatment of (apparent) final ān, īn, un, ṛn as if they were
āṃs, īṃs, uns, ṛṃs (long nasalized vowel with final s), shows itself
also in other Vedic forms of combination, which, for the sake of unity,
may be briefly stated here together:
a. Final ān becomes āṃ (nasalized ā) before a following vowel: that
is to say, ans, with nasal vowel, is treated like ās, with pure vowel
(177): thus, devā́ṃ é 'há, úpabaddhāṃ ihá, mahā́ṃ asi. This is an
extremely common case, especially in RV. Once or twice, the s appears
as ḥ before p: thus, svátavāṃḥ pāyúh.
b. In like manner, s is treated after nasal ī, ū, v as it would be
after those vowels when pure, becoming r before a sonant sound (174),
and (much more rarely) h before a surd (170): thus, raśmīṃr iva,
sūnū́ṃr yuvanyū́ṃr út, nṛṃr abhí; nṛṃḥ pā́tram (and ńṝ́ṃṣ p-, MS.).
c. RV. has once -īṃ before y. MS. usually has aṃ instead of āṃ.
210. The nasals n, ṇ, ṅ, occurring asfinals after a short vowel,
are doubled before any initial vowel: thus, pratyáṅṅ úd eṣi, udyánn
ādityáḥ, āsánn-iṣu.
a. This is also to be regarded as a historical survival, the second
nasal being an assimilation of an original consonant following the first. It
is always written in the manuscripts, although the Vedic metre seems to
show that the duplication was sometimes omitted. The RV. has the compound vṛṣaṇaśva.
211. The nasals ṅ and ṇ before a sibilant are allowed to insert respectively k and ṭ — as n (207) inserts t: thus, pratyáṅk
sómaḥ.
71 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL m. [—213
Combinations of final ^ m.
212 . Final radical -7 m, in internal combination, is assimilated to a following mute or spirant — in the latter case,
becoming anusvāra ; in the former, becoming the nasal of
the same class with the mute.
a. Before m or v (as when final: 143a), it is changed to n: thus,
from √gam come áganma, aganmahi, ganvahi, jaganvā́ṃs (which
appear to be the only quotable cases). According to the grammarians, the
same change is made in the inflection of root-stems before bh and su:
thus, praśānbhis, praśānsu (from praśām: pra+√śam). No derived
noun-stem ends in m.
b. The ŚB. and KŚS. have kámvant and śámvant, and ChU. has
kamvara.
213 . Final if m in external combination is a servile
sound, being assimilated to any following consonant. Thus:
a. It remains unchanged only before a vowel or a labial mute.
b. But also, by an anomalous exception, before r of the root rāj in
samrā́j and its derivatives samrā́jñī and sāmrājya.
c. Before a mute of any other class than labial, it becomes the
nasal of that class.
d. Before the semivowels y‚ l9 v it becomes, according to the
Hindu gramarians, a nasal semivowel, the nasal counterpart of each
respectively (see 71).
e. Before r, a sibilant, or h, it becomes anusvāra (see 71).
f. The manuscripts and the editions in general make no attempt to
distinguish the nasal tones produced by the assimilation of m before a following semivowel from that before a spirant.
g. But if h be immediately followed by another consonant (which
can only be a nasal or semivowel), the m is allowed to be assimilated to
that following consonant. This is because the h has no position of the
mouth-organs peculiar to itself, but is uttered in the position of the next
sound. The Prātiśākhyas do not take any notice of the case.
h. Cases are met with in the Veda where a final m appears to be
dropped before a vowel, the final and initial vowels being then combined
into one. The pada-text then generally gives a wrong interpretation.
Thus, saṁvánano 'bhayaṁkarám (RV. viii. 1.2; pada-text -nanā
ubh-; SV. -nanam).
i. It has been pointed out above (73) that the assimilated m is
generally represented in texts by the anusvāra-sign, and thatin this
work it is transliterated by ṁ (instead of a nasal mute or n).
214—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 72
The palatal mutes and sibilant, and ~ h.
214. These sounds show in some situations a reversion (43)
to the original gutturals from which they are derived. The treatment of j and h, also, is different, according as they represent the
one or the other of two different degrees of alteration from their
originals.
215. The palatals and h are the least stable of alphabetic sounds,
undergoing, in virtue of their derivative character, alteration in many
cases where other similar sounds are retained.
216. Thus, in derivation, even before vowels, semivowels; and
nasals, reversion to guttural form is by no means rare. The cases are
the following:
a. Before a of suffix a, final c becomes k in aṅká, śvaṅka, arká,
pāká, vāká, śúka, parka, marká, vṛ́ka, prátīka etc., reka, séka,
moka, roká, śóka, toká, mroká, vraská; — final j becomes g in
tyāgá, bhága, bhāgá, yāga, aṅga, bhaṅgá, saṅga, svaṅga, ṛṅga,
tuṅga, yuṅga, varga, mārga, mṛgá, varga, sarga, nega, vega, bhóga,
yugá, yóga, loga, róga; — final h becomes gh in aghá, maghá,
arghá, dīrghá (and drā́ghīyas, drā́ghiṣṭha), degha, meghá, ogha,
dógha, drógha, mógha; and in dúghāna and méghamāna. In neka
(j/nij) we have further an anomalous substitution of a surd, for the final
sonant of the roof.
b. In another series of derivatives with a, the altered sound appears:
examples are ajá, yāja, śucá, śoca, vrajá, vevijá, yuja, ūrjā́, dóha.
C Before the suffixes as and ana, the guttural only rarely appears:
namely, in áṅkas, ókas, rókas, śókas, bhárgas, and in rogaṇa; also
in ābhogáya.
d. Before an i-vowel, the altered sound appears (except in ābhogí,
ógīyaṃs, tigitá, mokī, sphigī́): thus, ājí, tují, rúci, śácī, vívici,
rociṣṇú.
e. Before u, the guttural reappears, as a rule (the cases are few):
thus, aṅku, vaṅkú, rekú, bhṛ́gu, mā́rguka, raghú (and rághīyaṃs).
f. Before n, the examples of reversion are few, except of j (becoming
g) before the participial ending na (957 c): thus, rékṇas, vagnú (with
the final also made sonant); and participles bhagná, rugṇá, etc.; and
apparently pṛgṇa from √pṛc.
g. Before m (of ma, man, mant, min), the guttural generally
appears: thus, rukmá, tigmá, yugma, ṛ́gma (with sonant change); tak¬
mán, vákman, sákman, yugmán; rúkmant; ṛgmín and vāgmín
(with sonant change): — but ájman, ojmán, bhujmán.
h. Before y, the altered sound is used : thus, pacya, yajya, yajyu,
yujya, bhujyu. Such cases as bhogya, yogya, negya, okya are doubtless secondary derivatives from bhoga etc.
7 3 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL PALATALS. [—218
i. Before r, the cases are few, and the usage apparently divided,
thus, takra, sakra, vakrá, śukrá, vigrá, ugrá, túgra, mṛgra, váṅ¬
kri; but vájra and pajrá(?),
j . Before v (of the suffixes va, van, vin, etc., and participial vans)
the guttural is regularly preserved : thus, ṛkvá, pakvá, vákva; vákvan,
ṛ́kvan, rikvan, śukvan, mṛgvan, túgvan, yugvan; ṛ́kvant, pṛ́k¬
vant; vāgvín, vagvaná, vagvanú (with further sonant change; vivak¬
vā́ṃs, ririkvā́ṃs, vivikvā́ṃs, rurukvā́ṃs, śuśukvā́ṃs; śuśukvaná,
śuśukváni: also before the union-vowel i in okivā́ṃs (RV., once). An
exception is yájvan.
k. The reversion of h in derivation is comparatively rare. ‚The final
j which is analogous with ś (219) shows much less proclivity to reversion
than that which corresponds with c.
I. A like reversion shows itself also to some extent in conjugational
stem-formation and inflection. Thus, the initial radical becomes guttural
after the reduplication in the present or perfect or desiderative or intensive
stems, orin derivatives, of the roots ci, cit, ji, hi, han, and in jáguri (√jṛ);
and han becomes ghn on the elision of a (402, 637). The RV. has
vivakmi from √vac and vāvakre from √vañc; and SV. has sasṛgmahe
(RV.-sṛj-). And before ran etc. of 3d pi. mid. we have g for radical j
in asṛgran, asṛgram, asasṛgram (all in RV.).
217. Final t[ c of a root or stem, if followed in in¬
ternal combination by any other sound than a vowel or
semivowel or nasal, reverts (43) to its original guttural value,
and shows everywhere the same form which a "fí k would
show in the same situation.
Thus, vákti, uváktha, vákṣi, vakṣyā́mi, vagdhi; vāgbhís, vāk¬
ṣú; uktá, ukthá, vaktár.
a. And, as final c becomes k (above 142), the same rule applies
also to c in external combination: thus, vā́k ca, vā́g ápi, van me.
Examples of c remaining unchanged in inflection are: ucyáte,
riricré, vācí, mumucmáhe.
218. Final EM? reverts to its original ~^ k, in internal
combination, only before the H s of a verbal stem or ending
(whence, by 180, Śī ks); before rT t and 21 th, it everywhere
becomes “^ṣ (whence, by 197, *~ ṣṭ and "5" ṣṭh); before ^ dh,
H bh, and H su of the loc. pi., as when final (145), it re¬
gularly becomes the lingual mute (^ṭ or I^ḍ).
Thus, ávikṣata, vekṣyā́mi; váṣṭi, viṣṭá, dídeṣṭu; didiḍḍhi,
viḍbhís.
218—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 74
a. But a few roots exhibit the reversion of final ś to k before
bh and su, and also when final (145): they are diś, dṛś, spṛś, and
optionally naś; and viś has in V. always vikṣú, loc. pi., but víṭ,
viḍbhís, etc. Examples are díksaṁśita, dṛgbhís, hṛdispṛ́k, nák
(or naṭ).
Examples of ś remaining unchanged before vowels etc. are: viśí,
viviśyās, aviśran, aśnomi, vaśmi, uśmási.
b. A ś remains irregularly unchanged before p in the compound viśpáti.
219. Final sT j is in one set of words treated like 3" C,
and in another set like 51 c,
•s. '
Thus, from yuj: áyukthās, áyukta, yuṅkté, yukti, yóktra,
yokṣyā́mi, yukṣú; yuṅgdhí, áyugdhvam, yugbhís.
Again, from mṛj etc.: ámṛkṣat, srakṣyā́mi; mā́rṣṭi, mṛṣṭá,
sṛ́ṣṭi, rāṣṭrá; mṛḍḍhí, mṛḍḍhvám, rāḍbhís, rāṭsú, rā́ṭ.
a. To the former or yuj-class belong (as shown by their quotable
forms) about twenty roots and radical stems: namely, bhaj, saj, tyaj (not
V.), raj color,svaj, majj, nij, tij, vij, 1 and 2 bhuj, yuj, ruj, vṛj,
añj, bhañj, śiñj; ū́rj, sráj, bhiṣáj, ásṛj ; — also, stems formed with
the suffixes aj and ij (383. IV), as tṛṣṇáj, vaṇíj; and ṛtvíj, though
containing the root yaj.
b. To the latter or mṛj-class belong only about one third as many :
namely, yaj, bhrajj, vraj, rāj, bhrāj, mṛj,sṛj.
c. A considerable number of j-roots are not placed in circumstances
to exhibit the distinction; but such roots are in part assignable to one or
the other class on the evidence of the related languages. The distinction
appears, namely, only when the j occurs as final, or is followed, either in
inflection or in derivation, by a dental mute (t, th, dh), or, in nouninflection, by bh or su. In derivation (above, 216) we find a g sometimes from the mṛj-class: thus, mārga, sárga, etc.; and (2161) before
Vedic mid. endings, sasṛgmahe, asṛgran, etc. (beside sasṛjrire) —
while from the yuj-class occur only yuyujre, ayujran, bubhujrire,
with j . And MS. has viśvasṛ́k from (√sṛj).
220. Final ch falls under the rules of combination almost only
in the root prach, in which it is treated as if it were ś (praś being, indeed, its more original form): thus, prakṣyā́mi, pṛṣṭá, and also
the derivative praśná. Asfinaland in noun-inflection (before bh and
su), it is changed to the lingual mute: thus, prāḍvivāka.
a. Mūrtá is called the participle of mūrch, and a gerund mūrtvā́
is given to the same root. They (with mū́rti) must doubtless come from
a simpler form of the root.
b. Of jh there is no occurrence: the grammarians require itto
be treated like c.
75 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL kṣ, h. [—223
221. The compound kṣ is not infrequent as final of a root (generally of demonstrably secondary origin), or of a tense-stem (s-aorist:
see below, 878 ff.); and, in the not very frequent cases of itsinternal combination, it is treated as if a single sound, following the
rules for ś: thus śákṣe (cakṣ + se), cákṣva; cáṣṭe, ácaṣṭa, ásrāṣ¬
ṭam, ásṛṣṭa, tváṣṭar. As to its treatment when final, see 146.
a. Thus, we are taught by the grammarians to make such forms as
goráṭ, goráḍbhis, goráṭṣ u (from gorákṣ); and we actually have ṣáṭ,
ṣaḍbhís, ṣaṭsú from ṣakṣ or ṣaṣ (146 b). For jagdha etc. from
√jakṣ, see 233 f.
b. In the single anomalous root vraśc , the compound ś c is said to
follow the rules for simple ś. From it are quotable the future vrakṣyáti,
the gerunds vṛṣṭvā́ (AV.) and vṛktvī́ (RV.), and the participle (957 c)
vṛkṇá . Its c reverts to k in the derivative vraska.
222. The roots in final h, like those in fall into
two classes, exhibiting a similar diversity of treatment, appearing in the same kinds of combination.
a. In the one class, as duh, we have a reversion of h (as of c)
to a guttural form, andyts treatment as ifit were still its original gh:
thus, ádhukṣam, dhokṣyā́mi; dugdhā́m, dugdhá ; ádhok, dhúk ,
dhugbhís, dhukṣú.
b. In the other class, as r u h and sah, we have a guttural reversion (as of ś) only before s in verb-formation and derivation: thus,
árukṣat, rokṣyā́mi, sākṣīyá , sakṣáṇi. As final, in external combination, and in noun-inflection before bh and s u , the h (like ś) becomes a lingual mute: thus, turāṣā́ṭ, pṛtanāṣā́ḍ ayodhyáḥ, turā–
ṣā́ḍbhis, turāṣā́ṭsu. But before a dental mute (t, th, dh) in verbinflection and in derivation, its euphonic effect is peculiarly complicated: it turns the dental into a lingual (as would ś); but it also
makes it sonant and aspirate (as would ḍ h : see 160); and further,
it disappears itself, and the preceding vowel, if short, is lengthened:
thus, from r u h with ta comes rūḍhá , from leh with t i comes léḍhi,
from guh with tar comes gūḍhár, from meh with tum comes mé¬
ḍhum, from lih with tas or thas comes līḍhás, from lih with dhvam
comes līḍhvám, etc.
C This is as if we had to assume as transition sound a sonant aspirate lingual sibilant zh, with the euphonic effects of a lingual and of a
sonant aspirate (160), itself disappearing under the law of the existing
language which admits no sonant sibilant.
223. The roots of the two classes, as shown by their forms
found in use, are:
a. of the first or duh-class: dah, dih, duh, druh, muh, snih
(and the final of uṣṇíh is similarly treated);
223—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 76
b. of the second or ruh-class: vah, sah, mih, rih or lih, guh,
ruh, dṛṃh, tṛṃh, bṛh, baṃh, spṛh(P).
c. But muh forms also (not in RV.) the participle mūḍha and agent–
noun mūḍhár, as well as mugdhá and mugdhár; and druh and snih
are allowed by the grammarians to do likewise: such forms as drūḍha
and snīḍha, however, have not been met with in use.
d. From roots of the ruh-class we find also in the Veda the forms
gartārúk, nom. sing., and prāṇadhṛ́k and dadhṛ́k; and hence puruspṛ́k
(the only occurrence) does not certainly prove √spṛh to be of the duhclass.
e. A number of other h-roots are not proved by their occurring forms
to belong to either class; they, too, are with more or less confidence assigned to the one or the other by comparison with the related languages.
f. In derivation, before certain suffixes (216), we have gh instead
of h from verbs of either class.
g. The root nah comes from original dh instead of gh, and its reversion is accordingly to a dental mute: thus, natsyā́mi, naddhá, upānád¬
bhis, upānadyuga, anupānatka. So also the root grah comes from
(early Vedic) grabh, and shows labials in many forms and derivatives
(though it is assimilated to other h-roots in the desiderative stem jighṛkṣa).
In like manner, h is used for dh in some of the forms and derivatives of
√dhā put; and further analogous facts are the stem kakuhá beside
kakubhá, the double imperative ending dhi and hi, and the dative
máhyam beside túbhyam (491).
224. Irregularities of combination are:
a. The vowel ṛ is not lengthened after the loss of the h-element:
thus, dṛḍhá, tṛḍhá, bṛḍhá (the only cases; and in the Veda their first
syllable has metrical value as heavy or long).
b. The roots vah and sah change their vowel to o instead of lengthening it: thus, voḍhám, voḍhā́m, voḍhár, sóḍhum. But from sah
in the older language forms with ā are more frequent: thus, sāḍhá, áṣāḍha
(also later), sā́ḍhar. The root tṛṃh changes the vowel of its class-sign
na into e instead of lengthening it: thus, tṛṇeḍhi, tṛṇéḍhu, atṛṇet
(the grammarians teach also tṛṇehmi and tṛṇekṣi: but no such forms
are quotable, and, if ever actually in use, they must have been made by
false analogy with the others).
c. These anomalous vowel-changes seem to stand in connection with
the fact that the cases showing them are the only ones where other than
an alterant vowel (180) comes before the lingualized sibilant representative
of the h. Compare ṣóḍaśa etc.
d. Apparently by dissimilation, the final of vah in the anomalous
compound anaḍvah is changed to d instead of ḍ: see 404.
77 COMBINATIONS OF FINAL ṣ. [-226
The lingual sibilant
225. Since the lingual sibilant, in its usual and normal occurrences, is (182) the product of lingualization of s after certain alterant
sounds, we might expect final radical ṣ, when (in rare cases) it comes
to stand where a ṣ cannot maintain itself, to revert to its original,
and be treated as a s would be treated under the same circumstances.
That, however, is true only in a very few instances.
a. Namely, in the prefix dus (evidently identical with √duṣ); in
sajū́s (adverbially used case-form from √juṣ); in (RV.) vivés and ávives,
from √viṣ; in āíyes (RV.), from √īṣ; and in āśís, from śiṣ as secondary form of √śās. A l l these, except the first two, are more or less open
to question.
226. In general, final lingual "Tjs, in internal combination, is treated in the same manner as palatal ET ś. Thus:
a. Before t and th it remains unchanged, and the latter are assimilated: e. g. dviṣṭas, dviṣṭhas, dvéṣṭum.
This is a common and perfectly natural combination,
b. Before dh, bh, and su, as also in external combination (145),
it becomes a lingual mute; and dh is made lingual after it: e. g.
piṇḍḍhi, viḍḍhi, viviḍḍhi, dviḍḍhvam, dviḍbhís, dviṭsú; bhin¬
naviṭka.
c. So also the dh of dhvam as ending of 2d pi. mid. becomes ḍh
after final ṣ of a tense-stem, whether the ṣ be regarded as lost or as converted to ḍ before it (the manuscripts write simply ḍhv, not ḍḍhv; but
this is ambiguous: see 232). Thus, after ṣ of s-aorist stems (881 a), asto¬
ḍhvam, avṛḍhvam, cyoḍhvam (the only quotable cases), from astoṣ+
dhvam etc.; but arādhvam from arās+dhvam. Further, after the s
of iṣ-aorist stems (901a), āindhiḍhvam, artiḍhvam, ajaniḍhvam,
vepiḍhvam (the only quotable cases), from ajaniṣ+dhvam etc. Yet
again, in the precative (924), as bhaviṣīḍhvam, if, as is probable
(unfortunately, no example of this person is quotable from any part of the
literature), the precative-sign s (ṣ) is to be regarded as present in the
form. According, however, to the Hindu grammarians, the use of ḍh or of
dh in the iṣ-aorist and precative depends on whether the i of iṣ or of
iṣī is or is not "preceded by a semivowel or h" — which both in itself
appears senseless and is opposed to the evidence of all the quotable forms.
Moreover, the same authorities prescribe the change of dh to ḍh, under
the same restriction as to circumstances, in the perf. mid. ending dhve
also : in this case, too, without any conceivable reason; and no example
of ḍhve in the 2d pi. perf. has been pointed out in the literature.
d. The conversion of ṣ to ṭ (or ḍ) as final and before bh and su
is parallel with the like conversion of ś‚ and of j and h in the mṛj and
226—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 78
ruh classes of roots, and perhaps with the occasional change of s to t
(167—8). It is a very infrequent case, occurring (save as it may be
assumed in the case of ṣaṣ) only once in RV. and once in A V. (-dviṭ
and -pruṭ), although those texts have more than 40 roots with final ṣ;
in the Brāhmaṇas, moreover, have been noticed further only -prut and víṭ
(ŚB.), and -śliṭ (K‚). From piṃṣ, RV. has the anomalous form piṇak
(2d and 3d sing., for pinaṣ-s and pinaṣ-t).
e. Before s in internal combination (except su of loc pi.) it becomes k: thus, dvékṣi, dvekṣyā́mi, ádvikṣam.
f. This change is of anomalous phonetic character, and difficult of
explanation. It is also practically of very rare occurrence. The only RV.
examples (apart from piṇak, above) are vivekṣi, from √viṣ, and the
desid. stem ririkṣa from √riṣ; AV. has only dvikṣat and dvikṣata,
and the desid. stem śiślikṣa from √śliṣ. Other examples are quotable
from √√kṛṣ and piṣ and viṣ (ŚB etc.), and śiṣ (ŚB.); and they are by
the Hindu grammarians prescribed to be formed from about half-a-dozen
other roots.
Extension and Abbreviation.
227. As a general rule, ch is not allowed by the grammariansto
stand in that form after a vowel, but is to be doubled, becoming cch
(which the manuscripts sometimes write chch).
a. The various authorities disagree with one another in detail as to
this duplication. According to Pāṇini, ch is doubled within a word after
either a long or a short vowel; and, as initial, necessarily after a short
and after the particles ā́ and mā, and optionally everywhere after a long.
In RV., initial ch is doubled after a long vowel of ā́ only, and certain
special cases after a short vowel are excepted. For the required usage in
the other Vedic texts, see their several Prātiśākhyas. The Kāṭhaka writes
for original ch (not ch from combination of t or n with ś: 203) after
a vowel everywhere śch. The manuscripts in general write simple ch.
b. Opinions are still at variance as to how far this duplication has
an etymological ground, and how far it is only an acknowledgment of the
fact that ch makes a heavy syllable even after a short vowel (makes
"position": 79). As the duplication is accepted and followed by most
European scholars, it will be also adopted in this work in words and sentences (not in roots and stems).
228. After r, any consonant (save a spirant before a vowel) is
by the grammarians either allowed or required to be doubled (an aspirate, by prefixing the corresponding non-aspirate: 154).
Thus:
^c-fí arka, or ) arkka; 3fīTCJ karya, or IT kāryya;
j~f artha, or ^Tc"T arttha; ^ dīrgha, or ^Tj~ dīrggha.
7 9 EXTENSION AND ABBREVIATION. [—231
a. Some of the authorities include, along with r, also h or 1 or v,
or more than one of them, in this rule.
b. A doubled consonant after r is very common in manuscripts and
inscriptions, as also in native text-editions and in the earlier editions prepared by European scholars — in later ones, the duplication is universally
omitted.
c. On the other hand, the manuscripts often write a single consonant
after r where a double one is etymologically required : thus, kārtikeya,
vārtika, for kārttikeya, vārttika.
229. The first consonant of a group — whether interior, or initial
after a vowel of a preceding word — is by the grammarians either allowed
or required to be doubled.
a. This duplication is allowed by Pāṇini and required by the Prāti¬
śākhyas — in both, with mention of authorities who deny it altogether.
For certain exceptions, see the Prātiśākhyas; the meaning of the w
r
hole
matter is too obscure to justify the giving of details here.
230. Other cases of extension of consonant-groups, required by
some of the grammatical authorities, are the following:
a. Between a non-nasal and a nasal mute, the insertion of so-called
yamas (twins), or nasal counterpcirts, is taught by the Prātiśākhyas (and
assumed in Pāṇini's commentary): see APr, i . 99, note.
b. Between h and a following nasal mute the Prātiśākhyas teach the
insertion of a nasal sound called nāsikya: see APr. i . 100, note.
c. Between r and a following consonant the Prātiśākhyas teach the
insertion of a svarabhakti or vowel-fragment: see APr. i . 101—2, note.
d. Some authorities assume this insertion only before a spirant; the
others regard it as twice as long before a spirant as before any other consonant — namely, a half or a quarter mora before the former, a quarter
or an eighth before the latter. One (VPr.) admits it after 1 as well as r.
It is variously described as a fragment of the vowel a or of ṛ (or 1),
e. The RPr. puts a svarabhakti also between a sonant consonant
and a following mute or spirant; and APr. introduces an element called
sphoṭana (distinguisher) between a guttural and a preceding mute of
another class.
f. For one or two other cases of yet more doubtful value, see the
Prātiśākhyas.
231. After a nasal, the former of two non-nasal mutes maybe dropped, whether homogeneous only with the nasal, or with both:
thus, yuṅdhí for yuṅgdhí, yuùdhvám for yuùgdhvám, āṅtám for
āùktám, paṅtí for paṅktí, chintā́m for chinttā́m, bhinthá for
bhintthá, indhé for inddhé.
a. This abbreviation, allowed by Pāṇini, is required by APr. (the
other Prātiśākhyas take no notice of it). It is the more usual practice of
the manuscripts, though the full group is also often written.
232—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 80
232. In general, a double mute (including an aspirate which is
doubled by the prefixion of a non-aspirate) in combination with any
other consonant is by the manuscripts written as simple.
a. That is to say, the ordinary usage of the manuscripts makes no
difference between those groups in which a phonetic duplication is allowed
by the rules given above (228, 229) and those in which the duplication
is etymological. As every tv after a vowel may also be properly written
ttv, so dattvā́ and tattvá may be, and almost invariably are, written as
datvā́ and tatvá. As kártana is also properly kárttana, so kārttika
(from kṛtti) is written as kārtika. So in inflection, we have always,
for example, majñā́ etc., not majjña, from majján. Even in composition and sentence-collocation the same abbreviations are made: thus,
hṛdyotá for hṛddyotá; chináty asya for chinátty asya. Hence it
is impossible to determine by the evidence of written usage whether we
should regard ādhvam or āddhvam (from √ās), ádviḍhvam or ádviḍ¬
ḍhvam (from √dviṣ), as the true form of a second person plural.
233. a. Instances are sometimes met with of apparent loss (perhaps
after conversion to a semivowel) of i or u before y or v respectively.
Thus, in the Brāhmaṇas, tu and nú with following vāí etc. often make
tvāí, nvāí (also tvā́vá, ánvāí); and other examples from the older language are anvart- (anu+√vart); paryan, paryanti, paryāyāt, paryā¬
ṇa (pari+yan, etc.); abhyàrti (abhi+iyarti); antaryāt (antar+
iyāt); cārvāc, cārvāka, cārvadana (cāru+vāc, etc.); kyànt for
kíyant; dvyoga (dvi+yoga); anvā, anvāsana (anu+vā, etc.); probably vyùnoti for ví yunoti (RV.), urváśī (uru-vaśī), śíśvarī for
śíśu-varī (RV.); vyāmá (vi+yāma); and the late svarṇa for suvarṇa.
More anomalous abbreviations are the common tṛcá (tri + ṛca); and
dvṛca (dvi+ṛca: S.) and treṇī (tri+eṇī: Āpast.).
Further, certain cases of the loss of a sibilant require notice. Thus:
b. According to the Hindu grammarians, the s of s-aorist stems is
lost after a short vowel in the 2d and 3d sing, middle: thus, adithās
and adita (1st sing, adiṣi), akṛthas and akṛta (1stsing, akṛṣi). It
is, however, probable that such cases are to be explained in a different
manner: see 834a.
c. The s between two mutes is lost in all combinations of the
roots sthā and stambh with the prefix ud: thus, ut thus, út¬
thita, út thāpaya, úttabdha, etc.
d. The same omission is now and then made in other similar cases:
thus cit kámbhanena (for skámbh-: RV.); tasmāt tute (for stute)
and puroruk tuta (for stuta: K.); the compounds ṛkthā (ṛk+sthā:
Pß.) and utphuliṅga; the derivative utphāla (j/sphal). On the other
hand, we have vidyút stanáyantī (RV.), utsthala, kakutstha, etc.
e. So also the tense-sign of the s-aorist is lost after a final consonant of a root before the initial consonant of an ending: thus, achāntta
81 ABBREVIATION OF CONSONANT-GROUPS. [-235
(and for this, by 231, achānta) for achāntsta, śāpta for śāpsta, tāp¬
tam for tāpstam, abhākta for abhāksta, amāuktam for amāukstam.
These are the only quotable cases: compare 883.
f. A final s of root or tense-stem is in a few instances lost after a
sonant aspirate, and the combination of mutes is then made as if no sibilant
had ever intervened. Thus, from the root ghas, with omission of the
vowel and then of the final sibilant, we have the form gdha (for ghs-ta:
3d sing, mid.), the participle gdha (in agdhā́d), and the derivative gdhi
(for ghs-ti; in sá-gdhi); and further, from the reduplicated form of the
same root, or √jakṣ, we have jagdha, jagdhum, jagdhvā, jagdhi
(from jaghs-ta etc.); also, in like manner, from baps, reduplication of
bhas, the form babdhām (for babhs-tām). According to the Hindu
grammarians, the same utter loss of the aorist-sign s takes place after a
final sonant aspirate of a root before an ending beginning with t or th:
thus, from √rudh, s-aorist stem arāuts act, and aruts mid., come the
active dual and plural persons arāuddham and arāuddhām and arāu¬
ddha, and the middle singular persons aruddhās and aruddha. None of
the active forms, however, have been found quotable from the literature,
ancient or modern; and the middle forms admit also of a different explanation : see 834, 883.
234. Under this head, we take up first the changes that affect
vowels, and then those that affect consonants — adding, for convenience's sake, in each case, a brief notice of the vowel and consonant elements that have come to bear the apparent office of connectives.
235. The so-called guṇa and vṛddhi-changes are the
most regular and frequent of vowel-changes, being of constant occurrence both in inflection and in derivation.
a. A guṇa-vowel (guṇa secondary quality) differs from
the corresponding simple vowel by a prefixed a-element,
which is combined with the other according to the usual
rules; a vṛddhi-vowel (vṛddhi growth, increment), by the
further prefixion of a to the guṇa-vowel. Thus, of ^ i or
§ ī the corresponding guṇa is (a+-i=) "J e; the corresponding vṛddhi is (a –+ e =) "J āi. But in all gunating processes
^ a remains unchanged — or, as it is sometimes expressed,
Strengthening and Weakening Processes.
Guṇa and Vṛddhi.
235--] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 8 2
ET a is its o w n guṇa; ETĪ ā , o f course , remain s unchange d
f o r bot h guṇ a a n d vṛddhi .
236 . T h e serie s o f correspondin g degree s is the n as
follows:
simple vowel a ā i ī u ū ṛ 1
guṇa a ā e o ar al
vṛddhi ā āi āu ār
a. There is nowhere any occurrence of ṛ in a situation to undergo
either guṇa or vṛddhi-change; nor does 1 (26) ever suffer change to
vṛddhi. Theoretically, ṛ would have the same changes as ṛ; and the
vṛddhi of 1 would be al.
b. In secondary derivatives requiring vṛddhi of the first syllable
(1204), the o of go (361c) is strengthened to gāu: thus, gāumata,
gāuṣṭhika.
237. The historical relations of the members of each vowel-series are
still matters of some difference of opinion. From the special point of view
of the Sanskrit, the simple vowels wear the aspect of being in general the
original or fundamental ones, and the others of being products of their
increment or strengthening, in two several degrees — so that the rules of
formation direct a, i , u, ṛ, 1 to be raised to guṇa or vṛddhi respectively,
under specified conditions. But ṛ has long been so clearly seen to come
by abbreviation or weakening from an earlier ar (or ra) that many European grammarians have preferred to treat the guṇa-forms as the original
and the other as the derivative. Thus, for example: instead of assuming
certain roots to be bhṛ and vṛdh, and making from them bharati and
vardhati, and bhṛta and vṛddha, by the same rules which from bhū
and nī and from budh and cit form bhavati and nayati, bodhati and
cetati, bhūta and nīta, buddha and citta — they assume bhar and
vardh to be the roots, and give the rules of formation for them in reverse.
In this work, as already stated (104 e), the ṛ-form is preferred.
238. The guṇa-increment is an Indo-European phenomenon,
and is in many cases seen to occur in connection with an accent on
the increased syllable. It is found —
a. In root-syllables: either in inflection, as dvéṣṭi from √dviṣ,
dóhmi from √duh; or in derivation, as dvéṣa, dóhas, dvéṣṭum,
dógdhum.
b. In formative elements: either conjugational class-signs, as
tanómi from tanu; or suffixes of derivation, in inflection or in further
derivation, as matáye from matí, bhānávas from bhānú, pitáram
from pitṛ́ (or pitár), hantavyà from hántu.
239. The vṛddhi-increment is specifically Indian, and its occurrence is less frequent and regular. It is found —-
83 GUN A A N D VRDDHI . [-242
a. In root and suffix-syllables, instead of guṇa: thus, stāúti
from √stu, sákhāyam from sákhi, ánāiṣam from √nī, ákārṣam
and kāráyati and kāryà from √kṛ (or kar), dātā́ram from dātṛ́ (or
dātár).
b. Especially often, in initial syllables in secondary derivation :
thus, mānasá from mánas, vāidyutá from vidyút, bhāumá from
bhū́mi, pā́rthiva from pṛthiví (1204),
But —
240. The guṇa-increment does not usually take place in a heavy
syllable ending with a consonant: that is to say, the rules prescribing
guṇa in processes of derivation and inflection do not apply to a short
vowel which is "long by position", norto a long vowel unless it be
final:thus, cétati from √cit, but nindati from √nind; náyati from
√nī, butjī́vati from √jīv.
a. The vṛddhi-increment is not liable to this restriction.
b. Exceptions to the rule are occasionally met with: thus, ehá, ehas
from √īh; heḍáyāmi, héḍas, etc., from √hīḍ; coṣa etc. from √cūṣ;
óhate etc. from √ūh consider; and especially, from roots in īv: didéva
deviṣyati, dévana, etc., from √dīv; tiṣṭheva from j/ṣṭhīv; sreváyāmi,
srévuka, from √srīv — on account of which it is, doubtless, that these
roots are written with iv (div etc.) by the Hindu grammarians, although
they nowhere show a short i , in either verb-forms or derivatives.
c. A few cases occur of prolongation instead of increment: thus,
dūṣáyati from √duṣ‚ gū́hati from √guh.
The changes ofṛ (more original ar or ra) are so various as to
call for farther description.
241. The increments of ṛ are sometimes ra and rā, instead of
ar and ār: namely, especially, where by such reversal a difficult combination of consonants is avoided: thus, from √dṛś, drakṣyā́mi
and ádrākṣam; but also pṛthú and prath, pṛch and prach, kṛpā́
and ákrapiṣṭa.
242. In a number of roots (about a dozen quotable ones) ending
in ṛ (for more original ar), the ṛ exchanges both with ar, and more
irregularly, in a part of the forms, with ir — or also with ur (especially after a labial, in pṛ, mṛ, vṛ, sporadically in others): which ir
and ur, again, are liable to prolongation into īr and ūr. Thus, for
example, from tṛ (or tar), we have tarati, titarti, tatāra, atāriṣam,
by regular processes; but also tirati, tīryati, tīrtvā, -tīrya, tīrṇa,
and even (V.) turyāma, tuturyāt, tarturāṇa. The treatment of such
roots hasto be described in speaking of each formation.
a. For the purpose of artificially indicating this peculiarity of treatment,
such roots are by the Hindu grammarians written with long ṛ, or with both
ṛ and f: no ṛ actually appears anywhere among their forms.
242—] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 84
b. The (quotable) ṛ-roots are 2kṛ strew, l g ṛ sing, 2 gṛ swallow,
l jṛ wear out, tṛ, lśṛ crush.
c. The (quotable) ṛ and ṛ-roots are ṛ, ld ṛ pierce, lpṛ fill, lmṛ die,
2 vṛ choose, stṛ, hvṛ,
d. Forms analogous with these are sometimes made also from other
roots : thus, cīrṇa, cīrtvā, carcūryá, from √car; spūrdhán and spūr¬
dháse from j/spṛdh.
243. In a few cases ṛ comes from the contraction of other syllables
than ar and ra: thus, in tṛta and tṛtīya, from r i ; in śṛṇu, from ru; in
bhṛkūṭi, from rū.
Vowel-lengthening.
244. Vowel-lengthening concerns especially i and u, since the
lengthening of a is in part (except where in evident analogy with
that of i and u) indistinguishable from its increment, and ṛ is made
long only in certain plural cases of stems in ṛ (or ar: 369 ff.). Lengthening is a much more irregular and sporadic change than increment, and its cases will in general be left to be pointed out in connection with the processes of inflection and derivation: a few only
will be mentioned here.
245. a. Final radical i and u are especially liable to prolongation
before y : as in passive and gerund and so on.
b. Final radical ir and ur (from variable ṛ–roots: 242) are liable to
prolongation before all consonants except those of personal endings: namely,
before y and tvā and na: and in declension before bh and s (392).
Radical is has the same prolongation in declension (392).
246. Compensatory lengthening, or absorption by a vowel of the time
of a lost following consonant, is by no means common. Certain instances
of it have been pointed out above (179, 198 c, d, 199d, 222 b), Perhaps
such cases as pitā for pitars (371a) and dhanī for dhanins (439)
are to be classed here.
247. The final vowel of a former member of a compound is often
made long, especially in the Veda. Prolongations of final a, and before
v, are most frequent; but cases are found of every variety. Examples are:
devāvī, vayunāvíd, prāvṛ́ṣ, ṛtāvasu, índrāvant, sadanāsád, śatā́¬
magha, viśvā́nara, ékādaśa; apījū́, parīṇáh, vīrúdh, tuvīmaghá,
tvíṣīmant, śáktīvant; vasūjū́, anūrúdh, sūmáya, purūvásu.
248. In the Veda, the final vowel of a word — generally a, much
less often i and u — is in a large number of cases prolonged. Usually
the prolongation takes place where it is favored by the metre, but sometimes even where the metre opposes the change (for details, see the various
Prātiśākhyas).
Words of which the finals are thus treated are:
85 VOWEL-LENGTHENING. [—250
a. Particles: namely, áthā, ádhā, evā́, utā́, ghā́, hā, ihā́, ivā,
cā, smā, nā́, aùgā́, kílā, átrā, yátrā, tátrā, kútrā, anyátrā, ubhay¬
átrā, adyā́, ácchā, ápā, prā́; átī, nī́, yádī, nahī, abhī́, vī́; ū, tū́,
nū́, sū́, makṣū́.
b. Case-forms: especially instr, sing,, as enā́, ténā, yénā, svénā,
and others; rarely gen. sing., as asyā, hariṇásyā. Cases besides these
are few: so símā, vṛṣabhā, hariyojanā (voc); tanvī (loc); and urū́
and (not rarely) purū́.
C Verb-forms ending in a, in great number and variety: thus(nearly
in the order of their comparative frequency), 2d sing. impv. act., as pibā,
syā, gamayā, dhāráyā; — 2d pi. act in ta and tha, as sthā, attā,
bibhṛtā, jayatā, śṛṇutā, anadatā, nayathā, jīvayathā (and one or
two in tana: aviṣṭanā, hantanā); — 1st pi. act. in ma, as vidmā,
riṣāmā, ṛdhyāmā, ruhemā, vanuyāmā, cakṛmā, marmṛjmā; —
2d sing. impv. mid. in sva, as yukṣvā, īḍiṣvā, dadhiṣvā, vahasvā;
— 1st and 3d sing. perf. act., as vedā, viveśā, jagrabhā; 2d sing. perf.
act., vetthā; — 2d pi. perf. act, anajā, eakrā. Of verb-forms ending
in i, only the 2d sing. impv. act.: thus, kṛdhī, kṛṇuhí, kṣidhí, śrudhī,
śṛṇudhī, śṛṇuhī, dīdihī, jahI.
d. To these may be added the gerund in ya (993 a), as abhi¬
gū́ryā, ā́cyā.
Vowel-lightening.
249. The alteration of short a to an i or u-vowel in the formative processes of the language, except in ṛ or ar roots (as explained
above), is a sporadic phenomenon only.
250. But the lightening of a long ā especially to an i-vowel
(as also its loss), is a frequent process; no other vowel is so unstable.
a. Of the class-sign nā (of the krī-class of verbs: 717 ff.), the
ā is in weak forms changed to Ī, and before vowel-endings dropped altogether. The final ā of certain roots is treated in the same manner: thus,
mā, hā, etc. (662—6). And from some roots, ā- and ī- or i-forms
so interchange that it is difficult to classify them or to determine the true
character of the root.
b. Radical ā is weakened to the semblance of the union-vowel i in
certain verbal forms: as perfect dadima from √dā etc. (794k); aorist
adhithās from √dhā etc. (834 a); present jahimas from √hā etc. (685).
c. Radical ā is shortened to the semblance of stem-a in a number of
reduplicated forms, as tiṣṭha, piba, dada, etc. : see 671—4; also in a
few aorists, as áhvam, ákhyam, etc.: see 847.
d. Radical ā sometimes becomes e, especially before y: as stheyā¬
sam, deya.
251-] III. EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 86
251. Certain ā-roots, because of their peculiar exchanges with ī and
i-forms, especially in forming the present stem, are given by the Hindu
grammarians asroots ending in e or āi or o. Thus, from 2dhā such (dhe)
come the present dháyati and participle and gerund dhītá, dhītvā́; the
other forms are made from dhā, as dadhus, adhāt, dhāsyati, dhā́tave,
dhāpayati. From 2gā sing (gāi) come the present gā́yati, the participle and gerund gītá and gītvā́, and passive gīyáte, and the other forms
from gā. From 3 dā cut (do) come the present dyáti and participle ditá
or diná, and the other forms from dā. The irregularities of these roots
will be treated below, under the various formations (see especially 761 d ff.).
252. By a process of abbreviation essentially akin with that of ar or
ra to ṛ, the va (usually initial) of a number of roots becomes u, and the
ya of a much smaller number becomes i, in certain verbal forms and derivatives. Thus, from vac come uvā́ca, ucyā́sam, uktvā́, uktá, uktí,
ukthá, etc.; from yaj come iyā́ja, ijyā́sam, iṣṭvā́, iṣṭá, íṣṭi, etc. See
below, under the various formations.
a. To this change is given by European grammarians the name of
samprasāraṇa, by adaptation of a term used in the native grammar,
253. A short a, of root or ending, is not infrequently lost between
consonants in a weakened syllable: thus, in verb-forms, ghnánti, ápaptam,
jagmús, jajñús, ájñata; in noun-forms, rā́jñe, rā́jñL
254. Union-vowels. A l l the simple vowels come to assume in
certain cases the aspect of union-vowels, or insertions between root or stem
and ending of inflection or of derivation.
a. That character belongs oftenest to i , which is very widely used:
1. before the s of aorist and future and desiderative stems, as in ájīviṣam,
jīviṣyā́mi, jíjīviṣāmi; 2. in tense-inflection, especially perfect, as jijī¬
vimá; occasionally also present, as ániti, róditi; 3. in derivation, as
jīvitá, khánitum, janitṛ́, rociṣṇú, etc. etc.
b. Long ī is used sometimes instead of short: thus, ágrahīṣam,
grahīṣyā́mi; bravīti, vāvadīti; tarītṛ́, savītṛ́; it is also often introduced before s and t of the 2d and 3d sing, of verbs: thus, ā́sīs, ā́sīt.
c. For details respecting these, and the more irregular and sporadic
occurrences of u- and a-vowels in the same character, see below.
Nasal Increment.
255. Both in roots and in endings, a distinction of stronger and
weaker forms is very often made by the presence or absence of a
nasal element, a nasal mute or anusvāra, before a following consonant. In general, the stronger form is doubtless the more original;
but, in the present condition of the language, the nasal has come in
great measure to seem, and to some extent also to be used, as an actually strengthening element, introduced under certain conditions in
formative and inflective processes.
87 NASAL INCREMENT. [-260
a. Examples are, of roots: ac and añc, grath and granth, vid
and vind, daś and daṃś, sras and sraṃs, dṛh and dṛṃh: of endings,
bhárantam and bháratā, mánasī and mánāṃsi.
256. A final n, whether of stem or of root, is less stable than any
other consonant, where a weaker form is called for: thus, from rā́jan we
have rā́jā and rā́jabhis, and in composition rāja; from dhaníní dhanī́
and dhanibhis and dháni; from √han we have hathá and hatá, etc.
A final radical m is sometimes treated in the same way: thus, from √gam,
gahí, gatám, gatá, gáti.
257. Inserted n. On the other hand, the nasal n has come to be
used with great — and, in the later history ofthe language, with increasing — frequency as a union-consonant, inserted between vowels: thus,
from agní, agnínā and agnīnā́m; from mádhu, mádhunas, mádhunī,
mádhūni; from śivá, śivéna, śivā́ni, śivā́nām.
258. Inserted y. a. After final ā of a root, a y is often found as
apparently a mere union-consonant before another vowel: thus, in inflection,
ádhāyi etc. (844), śāyáyati etc. (1042), śivā́yās etc. (363 c), gā́yati
etc. (761 e); further, in derivation, -gāya, -yāyam, dāyaka etc.;
-sthāyika; pāyána, -gāyana; dhā́yas, -hāyas; sthāyin etc. (many
cases); -hitāyin, -tatāyin; sthāyuka.
b. Other more sporadic cases of inserted y — such as that in the
pronoun-forms ayam, iyam, vayam, yūyam, svayam; and in optative
inflection before an ending beginning with a vowel (565) — will be pointed out below in their connection.
Reduplication.
259. Reduplication of a root (originating doubtless in its complete repetition) has come to be a method of radical increment or
strengthening in various formative processes: namely,
a. in present-stem formation (642ff.): as dádāmi, bibhármi;
b. in perfect-stem formation, almost universally (782ff.): as
tatā́na, dadhāú, cakā́ra, riréca, lulópa;
c. in aorist-stem formation (856 ff.): as ádīdharam, ácucyavam;
d. in intensive and desiderative - stem formation, throughout
(1000 ff., 1026 ff.): as jáṅghanti, jóhavīti, marmṛjyáte; pípāsati,
jíghāṃsati;
e. in the formation of derivative noun-stems (1143e): as pápri,
cárcara, sāsahí, cikitú, malimlucá.
f. Rules for the treatment of the reduplication in these several cases
will be given in the proper connection below.
260. As, by reason of the strengthening and weakening changes
indicated above, the same root or stem not seldom exhibits, in the
processes of inflection and derivation, varieties of stronger and weaker
form, the distinction and description of these varieties forms an important part of the subjects hereafter to be treated.
261---] I V . DECLENSION. 88
CHAPTE R I V .
DECLENSION .
261. The general subject of declension includes nouns, adjectives,
and pronouns, all of which are inflected in essentially the same manner.
But while the correspondence of nouns and adjectives is so close that
they cannot well be separated in treatment (chap. V.), the pronouns,
which exhibit many peculiarities, will be best dealt with in a separate
chapter (VII.); and the words designating number, or numerals, also
form a class peculiar enough to require to be presented by themselves (chap. VI.).
262. Declensional forms show primarily case and number; but they also indicate gender — since, though the
distinctions of gender are made partly in the stem itself,
they also appear, to no inconsiderable extent, in the changes of inflection.
263. Gender. The genders are three, namely masculine, feminine, and neuter, as in the other older Indo-European languages; and they follow in general the same laws
of distribution as, for example, in Greek and Latin.
a. The only words which show no sign of gender-distinction are the personal pronouns of the first and second person (491), and the numerals
above four (483).
264. Number . The numbers are three — singular,
dual, and plural.
a. A few words are used only in the plural: as dārās wife, apas
water; the numeral dva two, is dual only; and, as in other languages,
many words are, by the nature of their use, found to occur only in the
singular.
265. As to the uses of the numbers, it needs only to be remarked
that the dual is (with only very rare and sporadic exceptions) used
strictly in all cases where two objects are logically indicated, whether
directly or by combination of two individuals: thus, śivé te dyā́¬
vāpṛthiví ubhé stām may heaven and earth both be propitious to thee!
dāivaṁ ca mānuṣaṁ ca hotārāu vṛtvā having chosen both the divine
and the human sacrificers; pathor devayānasya pitṛyāṇasya ca of
the two paths leading respectively to the gods and to the Fathers.
89 CASES. [–-268
a. The dual is used alone (without dva two) properly wiien the
duality of the objects indicated is well understood: thus, aśvínāu the two
Aśvins; índrasya hárī Indras two bays; but tasya dvāv aśvāu staḥ
he has two horses. But now and then the dual stands alone pregnantly:
thus, vedaṁ vedāu vedān vā one Veda or two or more than two; eka¬
ṣaṣṭe śate two hundred and sixty-one.
266. Case. The cases are (including the vocative) eight:
nominative, accusative, instrumental, dative, ablative, genitive, locative, and vocative.
a. The order in which they are here mentioned is that established for
them by the Hindu grammarians, and accepted from these by Western scholars. The Hindu names of the cases are founded on this order: the nominative is called prathamā first, the accusative dvitīyā second, the genitive ṣaṣṭhī sixth (SC. vibhakti division, i . e. case), etc. The object
sought in the arrangement is simply to set next to one another those cases
which are to a greater or less extent, in one or another number, identical
in form; and, putting the nominative first, as leading case, there is no
other order by which that object could be attained. The vocative is not
considered and named by the native grammarians as a case like the rest;
in this work, it will be given in the singular (where alone it is ever distinguished from the nominative otherwise than by accent) at the end of the
series of cases.
A compendious statement of the uses of the cases is given in
the following paragraphs:
267. Uses of the Nominative. The nominative is the case
of the subject of the sentence, and of any word qualifying the subject, whether attributively, in apposition, or as predicate.
268. One or two peculiar constructions call for notice:
a. A predicate nominative, instead of an objective predicate in the
accusative, is used with middle verb-forms that signify regarding or calling
one's self: thus, sómam manyate papivā́n (RV.) he thinks he has been
drinking soma; sá manyeta purāṇavít (AV.) he may regard himself as
wise in ancient things; durgā́d vā́ āhartā́ 'vocathāḥ (MS.) thou hast
claimed to be a savior out of trouble; índro brāhmaṇó brúvāṇaḥ (TS.)
1ndra pretending to be a Brahman; katthase satyavādī (R.) thou boast¬
est thyself truthful. Similarly with the phrase rūpaṁ kṛ: thus, kṛṣṇó
rūpáṁ kṛtvā́ (TS.) taking on a black form (i. e. making shape for himself as one that is black).
b. A word made by iti (1102) logically predicate to an object is
ordinarily nominative: thus, svargó loká íti yáṁ vádanti (AV.) what
they call the heavenly world; tam agniṣṭoma ity ācakṣate (AB.) it
they style agniṣṭoma; vidarbharājatanayāṁ damayantī 'ti viddhi
mām (MBh.) know me for the Vidarbha-king's daughter, Damayantl by
268— I V . DECLENSION. 90
name. Both constructions are combined in ajñaṁ hi bālam ity āhuḥ
pite 'ty eva tu mantradam (M.) for to an ignorant man they give the
name of 'ch/7d', but that of i
father'>
to one who imparts the sacred texts.
c. A nominative, instead of a second vocative, is sometimes added to
a vocative by ca and: thus, índraś ca sómam pibatam bṛhaspate
(RV.) together with Indra, do ye two drink the soma, 0 Brhaspati! víśve
devā yájamānaś ca sīdatā (TS.) 0 ye All-Gods, and the sacrificer, take
seats !
269. Uses ofthe Accusative. The accusative is especially
the case ofthe direct object of a transitive verb, and of any w‚ord
qualifying that object, as attribute or appositive or objective predicate. The construction of the verb is shared, of course, by its participles and infinitives; but also, in Sanskrit, by a number of other
derivatives, having a more or less participial or infinitival character,
and even sometimes by nouns and adjectives. A few prepositions
are accompanied by the accusative. Asless direct object, or goal
of motion or action, the accusative is construed especially with verbs
of approach and address. It is found used more adverbially as adjunct of place or time or manner; and a host of adverbs are accusative cases in form. Two accusatives are often found as objects of
the same verb.
270. The use of the accusative as direct object of a transitive verb
and of its infinitives and participles hardly needs illustration; an example
or two are : agním īḍe I praise Agni; námo bhárantaḥ bringing homage ;
bhū́yo datum arhasi thou shouldst give more. Of predicate words qualifying the object, an example is tám ugráṁ kṛṇomi tám bráhmāṇam
(RV.) him 1 make formidable, him a priest.
271. Of verbal derivatives having so far a participial character that
they share the construction of the verb, the variety is considerable: thus —
a. Derivatives in u from desiderative stems (1038) have wholly the
character of present participles: thus, damayantīm abhīpsavaḥ (MBh.)
desiring to win Damayantl; didṛkṣur janakātmajām (K.) desiring to see
Janakas daughter. Rarely, also, the verbal noun in ā from such a root: thus,
svargam abhikāṅkṣayā (R.) with desire of paradise.
b. So-called primaiy derivatives in in have the same character: thus,
mā́m kāmínī (AV.) loving me; enam abhibhāṣiṇī (MBh.) addressing
him. Even the obviously secondary garbhin has in ŚB. the same construction : thus, sárvāṇi bhūtā́ni garbhy àbhavat he became pregnant
with all beings.
c. Derivatives in aka, in the later language: as, bhavantam abhi¬
vādakaḥ (MBh.) intending to salute you; mithilām avarodhakaḥ (R.)
besieging MithilU.
d. Nouns in tar, very frequently in the older language, and as periphrastic future forms (942 ff.) in the later: thus, hántā yó vṛtráṁ
91 USES OF THE ACCUSATIVE. [—273
sánito 'tá vā́jaṁ data maghā́ni (RV.) who slayeth the dragon, winneth
booty, bestoweth largesses; tau hī'daṁ sarvaṁ hartārāu (JB.) for they
seize on this universe ; tyaktāraḥ saṁyuge prāṇān (MBh.) risking life
in battle.
e. The root itself, in the older language, used with the value of a
present participle at the end of a compound: thus, yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r
ási (RV.) what offering thou surroundest (protectest); áhim apáḥ pari¬
ṣṭhā́m (RV.) the dragon confining the waters. Also a superlative of a rootstem (468, 471): thus, tváṁ vásu devayaté vániṣṭhaḥ (RV.) thou
art chief winner of wealth for the pious; tā́sómaṁ somapatamā (RV.)
they two are the greatest drinkers of soma.
f. The derivative in i from the (especially the reduplicated) root, in
the older language: thus, babhrír vájram papíḥ sómaṁ dadír gā́ḥ
(RV.) bearing the thunderbolt, drinking the êoma, bestowing kine; yajñám
ātániḥ. (RV.) extending the sacrifice.
g. Derivatives in uka, very frequently in the Brāhmaṇa language:
thus, vatsā́ṃś ca ghā́tuko vṛ́kaḥ (AV.) and the wolf destroys his calves;
véduko vā́so bhavati (TS.) he wins a garment; kā́mukā enaṁ stríyo
bhavanti (MS.) the women fall in love with him.
h. Other cases are more sporadic: thus, derivatives in a, as indro
dṛḍhā́ cid ārujáḥ (RV.) Indra breaks up even what is fast; nāi 'vā
'rhaḥ pāitṛkaṁ riktham (M.) by no means entitled to his father's estate;
— in atnu, as vīḍú cid ārujatnúbhih (RV.) with the breakers of whatever is strong; — in atha, as yajáthāya devā́n (RV.) to make offering
to the gods; — in ana, as taṁ nivāraṇe (MBh.) in restraining him;
svamāṃsam iva bhojane (R.) as if in eating one's own flesh; — in
ani, as samátsu turváṇiḥ pṛtanyū́n (RV.) overcoming foes in combats;
— in ti, as ná táṁ dhūrtíḥ (RV.) there is no injuring him; — in van,
as ápaścāddaghvā́ 'nnam bhavati (MS.) he does not come short of food;
— in snu, as sthirā́ ein namayiṣṇavah (RV.) bowing even firm
things.
272. Examples of an accusative with an ordinary noun or adjective
are only occasional: such words as ánuvrata faithful to, prátirūpa
corresponding to, abhidhṛṣṇu daring to cope with, pratyáñc opposite to,
may be regarded as taking an accusative in virtue of the preposition they
contain; also ánuka, as ánukā devā́ váruṇam (MS.) the gods are inferior
to Varuna. RV. has tám antárvatīh pregnant with him; and A V. has
mā́ṁ kā́mena through loving me*
273. The direct construction of cases with prepositions is comparatively restricted in Sanskrit (1123 ff.). With the accusative are oftenest
found prati, opposite to, in reference to, etc.; also anu after, in the course
of; antar or antarā between; rarely ati across; abhi against, to; and
others (1129). Case-forms which have assumed a prepositional value are
also often used with the accusative: as antareṇa, uttareṇa, dakṣiṇena,
avareṇa, ūrdhvam, ṛte.
274—] IV. DECLENSION. 92
274. The accusative is very often found also as object of verbs which
in the related languages are not transitive.
a. It stands especially as the goal of motion, with verbs of going,
bringing, sending, and the like: thus, vidarbhān agaman (MBh.) they
went to Vidarbha; divaṁ yayuh (MBh.) they went to heaven; vanagul¬
mān dhāvantaḥ (MBh.) running to woods and bushes; apó dívam úd
vahanti (AV.) they carry up waters to the sky; devā́n yaje (AV.) I make
offering to the gods.
b. With verbs meaning go, this is an extremely common construction;
and the use of such a verb with an abstract noun makes peculiar phrases
of becoming: thus, samatām eti he goes to equality (i. e. becomes equal);
sa gacched badhyatām mama (MBh.) he shall become liable to be slain
by me; sa pañcatvam āgataḥ (H.) he was resolved into the five elements
(underwent dissolution, died).
c. Verbs of speaking follow the same rule: thus, tam abravīt he
said to him; prākrośad uccāir nāiṣadham (MBh.) she cried out loudly
to the Nishadhan; yás tvo 'vā́ca (AV.) who spoke to thee.
d. The assumption of an accusative object is exceptionally easy in
Sanskrit, and such an object is often taken by a verb or phrase which is
strictly of intransitive character: thus, sáhasā prā́ 'sy anyā́n (RV.) in
might thou excellest (lit. art ahead) others; devā́ vāí bráhma sám avad¬
anta (MS.) the gods were discussing (lit. were talking together) brahman;
antár vāí mā yajñā́d yanti (MS.) surely they are cutting me off (lit.
are going between) from the offering; tā́ṁ sám babhūva (ŚB.) he had
intercourse with her.
275. Examples of the cognate accusative, or accusative of implied
object, are not infrequent: thus, tápas tapyāmahe (AV.) we do penance;
té hāi 'tā́m edhatúm edhā́ṁ cakrire (ŚB.) they prospered with that
prosperity; uṣitvā sukhavāsam (R.) abiding happily.
276. The accusative is often used in more adverbial constructions.
Thus:
a. Occasionally, to denote measure of space: thus, yojanaśataṁ
gantum (MBh.) to go a hundred ledgues; ṣaḍ ucchrito yojanāni (MBh.)
six leagues high.
b. Much more often, to denote measure or duration of time: thus,
sá saṁvatsarám ūrdhvô «tiṣṭhat (AV.) he stood a year upright; tisró
rā́trīr dīkṣitáli syāt (TS.) lei him be consecrated three nights; gatvā
trīn ahorātrān (MBh.) having traveled three complete days.
c. Sometimes, to denote the point of space, or, oftener, of time:
thus, yā́m asya díśaṁ dásyuḥ syā́t (ŚB.) whatever region his enemy
may be in; ténāi 'tā́ṁ rā́triṁ sahā́ “ jagāma (ŚB.) he arrived that
night with him; imāṁ rajanīṁ vyuṣṭām (MBh.) this current night.
d. Very often, to denote manner or accompanying circumstance.
Thus, the neuter accusative of innumerable adjectives, simple or compound
93 USES OF THE ACCUSATIVE. [-279
(1111), is used adverbially, while certain kinds of compounds are thus
used to such an extent that the Hindu grammarians have made of them a
special adverbial class (1313).
e. Special cases are occasionally met with: thus, brahmacáryam
uvāsa (ŚB.) he kept a term of studentship; phalám pacyánte (MS.) they
ripen their fruit; gā́ṁ dīvyadhvam (MS., S.) gamble for a cow.
277. The accusative is, of course, freely used with other cases to
limit the same verb, as the sense requires. And whenever it is usable
with a verb in two different constructions, the verb may take two accusatives, one in each construction: and such combinations are quite frequent
in Sanskrit. Thus, with verbs of appealing, asking, having recourse: as,
apó yācāmi bheṣajám (RV.) I ask the waters for medicine; tvām ahaṁ
satyam icchāmi (R.) I desire truth from thee; tvāṁ vayaṁ śaraṇaṁ
gatāḥ (MBh.) we have resorted to thee for succor; — with verbs of bringing, sending, following, imparting, saying: as, gurutvaṁ naraṁ nayanti
(H.) they bring a man to respectability; sītā cā 'nvetu māṁ vanam
(R.) and let Sītā accompany me to the forest;supéśasam mā́ 'va sṛjanty
ástam (RV.) they let me go home well adorned;tāmidam abravīt (MBh.)
this he said to her; — and in other less common cases: as, vṛkṣám pa¬
kvám phálaṁ dhūnuhi (RV.) shake ripe fruit from the tree; tā́ṁ viṣám
evā́ 'dhok (AV.) poison he milked from her; jitvā rājyaṁ nalam (MBh.)
having won the kingdom from Nala; ámuṣṇītam paṇíṁ gā́ḥ (RV.) ye
robbed the Pani of the kine; draṣṭum icchāvaḥ putram paścimadar¬
śanam (R.) we wish to see our son for the last time.
a. A causative form of a transitive verb regularly admits two accusative objects: thus, devā́ṃ uśatáḥ pāyayā havíḥ (RV.) make the eager
gods drink the oblation; óṣadhīr evá phálaṁ grāhayati (MS.) he makes
the plants bear fruit; vaṇijo dāpayet karān (M.) he should cause the
merchants to pay taxes. But such a causative sometimes takes an instrumental instead of a second accusative: see 282b.
278. Uses of the Instrumental. The instrumental is originally the wit/i-case: it denotes adjacency, accompaniment, association
— passing over into the expression of means and instrument by the
same transfer of meaning which appears in the English prepositions
with and by.
a. Nearly all the uses of the case are readily deducible from this
fundamental meaning, and show nothing anomalous or difficult.
279. The instrumental is often used to signify accompaniment: thus,
agnír devébhir ā́ gamat (RV.) may Agni come hither along with the
gods; marúdbhī rudráṁ huvema (RV.) we would call Rudra with the
Maruts; dvāpareṇa sahāyena kva yāsyasi (MBh.) whither wilt thou go,
with Dvāpara for companion ? kathayan nāiṣadhena (MBh.) talking with
the Nishadhan. But the relation of simple accompaniment is more often
helped to plainer expression by prepositions (saha etc.: 284).
280—] IV. DECLENSION. 94
280. The instrumental of means or instrument or agent is yet more
frequent: thus, bhadráṁ kárṇebhiḥ śṛṇuyāma (RV.) may we hear
with our ears what is propitious; śastreṇa nidhanam (MBh.) death by
the sword; kecit padbhyāṁ hatā gajāiḥ. (MBh.) some were slain by the
elephants with their feet; pṛthak pāṇibhyāṁ darbhataruṇakāir nava¬
nītenā 'ṅguṣṭhopakaniṣṭhikābhyām akṣiṇī ājya (AGS.) anointing
their eyes with fresh butter, by help of the bunches of darbha-grass, with
the thumb and ring-finger, using the two hands successively. And this passes easily over into the expression of occasion or reason (for which the ablative is more frequent): thus, kṛpayā through pity; tena satyena in virtue of that truth.
281. Of special applications, the following may be noticed:
a. Accordance, equality, likeness, and the like: thus, samáṁ jyótiḥ.
sū́ryeṇa (AV.) a brightness equal with the sun; yeṣām ahaṁ na
pādarajasā tulyaḥ (MBh.) to the dust of whose feet I am not equal.
b. Price (by which obtained): thus, daśábhiḥ krīṇāti dhenúbhiḥ
(RV.) he buys wifh ten kine; gavāṁ śatasahasreṇa dīyatāṁ śabalā
mama (R.) let Śabalā be given me for a hundred thousand cows; sa te
'kṣahṛdayaṁ dātā rājā, 'śvahṛdayena vāi (MBh.) the king will give
thee the secret science of dice in return for that of horses.
c. Medium, and hence also space or distance orroad, traversed: thus,
udnā́ ná nā́vam anayanta (RV.) they brought [him] as it were a ship
by water; é 'há yātam pathíbhir devayā́nāiḥ (RV.) come hither by godtraveled paths; jagmur vihāyasā (MBh.) they went off through the air.
d. Time passed through, or by the lapse of which anything is brought
about: thus, vidarbhān yātum icchāmy ekāhnā (MBh.) I wish to go
to Vidarbha in the course of one day; te ca kālena mahatā yāuvanam
pratipedire (R,) and they in a long time attained adolescence; tatra
kālena jāyante mānavā dīrghajīvinaḥ. (M.) there in time are born men
long-lived. This use of the instrumental borders upon that of the locative
and ablative.
e. The part of the body on (or by) which anything is borne is usually
expressed by the instrumental: as, kukkuraḥ skandheno 'hyate (H.)
a dog is carried on the shoulder; and this construction is extended to such
cases as tulayā kṛtam (H.) puí on (i. e. so as to be carried by) a balance.
f. Not infrequent are such phrases as bahunā kim pralāpena (11.)
what is the use of (i. e. is gained by) much talking ? ko nu me jīvitenā
'rthaḥ (MBh.) what object is life to me? nīrujas tu kim āuṣadhāiḥ
(H.) but what has a well man to do with medicines?
g. An instrumental of accompaniment is occasionally used almost or
quite with the value of an instrumental absolute: thus, na tvayā 'tra
mayā Vasthitena kā 'pi cintā kāryā (Pane.) with me at hand, thou
need'st feel no anxiety whatever on this point.
95 USES OF THE INSTRUMENTAL. [-286
282. a. The construction of a passive verb (or participle) with an
instrumental of the agent is common from the earliest period, and becomes
decidedly more so later, the passive participle with instrumental taking to
no small extent the place of an active verb with its subject. Thus, yaména
dattáḥ (RV.) given by Yama; ṛ́ṣibhir ī́ḍyaḥ (RV.) to be praised by sages;
vyādhena jālaṁ vistīrṇam (H.) by the hunter a net [was] spread; tac
chrutvā jaradgaveno 'ktam (H.) Jaradgava, hearing this, said; mayā
gantavyam (H.) I shall go. A predicate to the instrumental subject of
such a construction is, of course, also in the instrumental: thus, adhunā
tavā 'nucareṇa mayā sarvathā bhavitavyam (H.) henceforth I shall
always be thy companion; avahitāir bhavitavyam bhavadbhih (Vikr.)
you must be attentive.
b. A causative verb sometimes takes an instrumental instead of an
accusative as second object: thus, tāṁ śvabhiḥ khādayed rājā (M.)
the king should have her devoured by dogs; tā́ váruṇenā 'grāhayat (MS.)
he caused Varuna to seize them.
283. Many instrumental constructions are such as call in translation
for other prepositions than with or by; yet the true instrumental relation
is usually to be traced, especially if the etymological sense of the words
be carefully considered.
a. More anomalously, however, the instrumental is used interchangeably with the ablative with words signifying separation: thus, vatsāír
víyutāḥ (RV.) separated from their calves; ma 'hám ātmánā ví rādh¬
iṣi (AV.) let me not be severed from the breath of life; sa tayā vyayuj¬
yata (MBh.) he was parted from her; pāpmánāi 'vāí 'naṁ ví punanti
(MS.) they cleanse him from evil (compare English parted with). The
same meaning may be given to the case even when accompanied by saha
with: thus, bhartrā saha viyogaḥ (MBh.) separation from her husband.
284. The prepositions taking the instrumental (1127) are those signifying with and the like: thus, saha, with the adverbial words containing
sa as an element, as sākam, sārdham, saratham; — and, in general,
a word compounded with sa, sam, saha takes an instrumental as its regular and natural complement. But also the preposition vinā without
takes sometimes the instrumental (cf. 283 a).
285. Uses of the Dative. The dative is the case of the
indirect object — of that toward or in the direction of or in order
to or for which anything is or is done (either intransitively or to a
direct object).
a. In more physical connections, the uses of the dative approach those
of the accusative (the more proper to-case), and the two are sometimes
interchangeable; but the general value of the dative as the toward- or forcase is almost everywhere distinctly to be traced.
286. Thus, the dative is used with —
a. Words signifying give, share out, assign, and the like: thus, yó ná
dádāti sákhye (RV.) who gives not to a friend; yácchā 'smāi śárma
(RV.) bestow upon him protection.
286-] IV. DECLENSION. 96
b. Words signifying show, announce, declare, and the like: thus,
dhanur darśaya rāmāya (R.) show the bow to Rāma; āvír ebhyo
abhavat sū́ryaḥ (RV.) the sun was manifested to them; ṛtuparṇam bhī¬
māya pratyavedayan (MBh.) they announced Rituparṇa to Bhīma; te¬
bhyaḥ pratijñāya (MBh.) having promised to them.
C Words signifying give attention, have a regard or feeling, aspire,
and the like: thus, niveśāya mano dadhuḥ (MBh.) they set their minds
upon encamping; māté 'va putrébhyo mṛḍa (AV.) be gracious as a
mother to her sons; kím asmábhyaṁ hṛṇīṣe (RV.) why art thou angry
at us? kāmāya spṛhayaty ātmā (Spr.) the soul longs for love.
d. WT
ords signifying please, suit, conduce, and the like: thus, yad¬
yad rocate viprebhyaḥ (M.) whatever is pleasing to Brahmans; tad ā¬
nantyāya kalpate (KU.) that makes for immortality.
e. Words signifying inclination, obeisance, and the like: thus, máhyaṁ
namantām pradíśaś cátasraḥ (RV.) let the four quarters bow themselves
to me; devebhyo namaskṛtya (MBh.) having paid homage to the gods.
f. Words signifying hurling or casting : as yéna dūḍā́śe ásyasi (AV.)
with which thou hurlest at the impious.
g. In some of these constructions the genitive and locative are also
used: see below.
287. In its more distinctive sense, as signifying for, for the benefit
of, with reference to, and the like, the dative is used freely, and in a
great variety of constructions. And this use passes over into that of the
dative of end or purpose, which is extremely common. Thus, íṣuṁ kṛṇ¬
vānā́ ásanāya (AV.) making an arrow for hurling; gṛhṇā́mi te sāu¬
bhagatvā́ya hástam (RV.) I take thy hand in order to happiness; rāṣṭrā́ya
máhyam badhyatāṁ sapátnebhyaḥ parābhúve (AV.) be it bound
on in orderto royalty for me, in orderto destruction for my enemies.
a. Such a dative is much used predicatively (and oftenest with the
copula omitted), in the sense of makes for, tends toward; also isintended
for, and so must; or is liable to, and so can. Thus, upadeśo mūrkhāṇām
prakopāya na śāntaye (H.) good counsel [tends] to the exasperation,
not the conciliation, of fools; sa ca tasyāḥ saṁtoṣāya nā 'bhavat (H.)
and he was not to her satisfaction; sugopā́ asi ná dábhāya (RV.) thou
art a good herdsman, not one for cheating (i. e. not to be cheated).
b. These uses of the dative are in the older language especially illustrated by the dative infinitives, for which see 982.
288. The dative is not used with prepositions (1124).
289. Uses of the Ablative. The ablative is the from-case,
in the various senses of that preposition; it is used to express removal, separation, distinction, issue, and the like.
290. The ablative is used where expulsion, removal, distinction, release, defense, and other kindred relations are expressed: thus, té sedhanti
pathó vṛ́kam (AV.) they drive away the wolf from the path; mā́ prá
97 USES OF THE ABLATIVE. [—292
gāma patháḥ (RV.) may we not go away from the path; éti vā́ eṣá
yajñamukhat (MS.) he verily goes away from the face of the sacrifice;
āré asmád astu hetíḥ (AV.) far from us be your missile; pātáṁ no
vṛ́kāt (RV.) save us from the wolf; ástabhnād dyā́m avasrásaḥ (RV.)
he kept (lit. made firm) the sky from falling.
291. The ablative is used where procedure or issue from something
as from a source or starting-point is signified: thus, śukrā́ kṛṣṇā́d aja¬
niṣṭa (RV.) the bright one has been born from the black one; lobhāt kro¬
dhaḥ prabhavati (MBh.) passion arises from greed; vā́tāt te prāṇám
avidam (AV.) / have won thy life-breath from the wind; yé prā́cyā diśó
abhidā́santy asmā́n (AV.) who attack us from the eastern quarter; tac
chrutvā sakhigaṇāt (MBh.) having heard that from the troop of friends;
vāyur antarikṣād abhāṣata (MBh.) the wind spoke from the sky.
a. Hence also, procedure as from a cause or occasion is signified by
the ablative: this is especially frequent in the later language, and in technical phraseology is a standing construction; it borders on instrumental
constructions. Thus, vájrasya śúṣṇād dadāra (RV.) from (by reason
of) the fury of the thunderbolt he burst asunder; yasya daṇḍabhayāt
sarve dharmam anurudhyanti (MBh.) from fear of whose rod all are
constant to duty; akāramiśritatvād ekārasya (Tribh.) because e contains an element of a.
b. Very rarely, an ablative has the sense of after: thus, agacchann
ahorātrāt tīrtham (MBh.) they went to the shrine after a whole day;
ṭakārāt sakāre takāreṇa (APr.) after ṭ, before s, is inserted t.
292. One or two special applications of the ablative construction are
to be noticed:
a. The ablative with words implying fear (terrified recoil from): thus,
tásyā jātā́yāḥ sárvam abibhet (AV.) everything was afraid of her at
her birth; yásmād réjanta kṛṣṭáyaḥ (RV.) at whom mortals tremble;
yuṣmád bhiyā́ (RV.) through fear of you; yasmān no 'dvijate lokaḥ
(BhG.) of whom theworld is not afraid.
b. The ablative of comparison (distinction from) : thus, prá ririce
divá índraḥ pṛthivyā́ḥ (RV.) indra is greater than the heaven and the
earth. With a comparative, or other word used in a kindred way, the ablative is the regular and almost constant construction: thus, svādóḥ svā́dī¬
yah (RV.) sweeter than the sweet; kiṁ tasmād duḥkhataram (MBh.)
what is more painful than that? ko mitrād anyaḥ (H.) who else than a
friend; gā avṛṇīthā mat (AB.) thou hast chosen the kine rather than me;
ajñebhyo granthinah śreṣṭhā granthibhyo dhāriṇo varāḥ (M.)
possessors of texts are better than ignorant men; rememberers are better than
possessors; tád anyátra tván ní dadhmasi (AV.) we set this down
elsewhere (away) from thee; purvā víśvasmād bhúvanāt (RV.) earlier
than all beings.
c. Occasionally, a probably possessive genitive is used with the comparative ; or an instrumental (as in a comparison of equality): thus,
Whitney , Grammar. 2. ed. 7
292—] I V . DECLENSION. 98
nā 'sti dhanyataro mama (R.) there is no one more fortunate than I
(i. e. my superior in fortune); putram mama prāṇāir garīyasam (MBh.)
a son dearer than my life.
d. Occasionally, an ablative is used instead of a partitive genitive:
thus, mithunād ekaṁ jaghāna (R.) he slew one out of the pair; tebhya
ekam (KSS.) one of them.
293. The ablative is used with a variety of prepositions and words
sharing a prepositional character (1128); but all these have rather an adverbial value, as strengthening or defining the from-relation, than any proper
governing force. We may notice here:
a. In the Veda, ádhi and pari are much used as directing and strengthening adjuncts with the ablative: as, jātó himávatas pari (AV.) born
from the Himalaya {forth); samudrā́d ádhi jajñiṣe (AV.) thou art born
from the ocean; cárantam pari tasthúṣaḥ (RV.) moving forth from that
which stands fast.
b. Also purā́ (and purás), in the sense of forward from, and hence
before: as, purā́ járasaḥ (RV.) before old age: and hence also, with words
of protection and the like, from: as śaśamānáḥ purā́ nidáḥ (RV.) securing from ill-will.
c. Also a, in the sense of hither from, all the way from: as, ā́ mū́lād
ánu śuṣyatu (AV.) let it dry completely up from the root; tásmād a
nadyô nama stha (AV.) since that time ye are called rivers. But usually, and especially in the later language, the measurement of interval
implied in a is reversed in direction, and the construction means all the
way to, until: as, yatī́ giríbhya ā́ samudrā́t (RV.) going from the
mountains to the ocean; t, 'syá yajñásyo 'dṛ́caḥ (VS.) until the end of
this sacrifice; ā ṣoḍaśāt (M.) till the sixteenth year; ā pradānāt (Ś.)
until her marriage.
294. Uses of the Genitive, a. The proper value of the
genitive is adjectival; it belongs to and qualifies a noun, designating
something relating to the latter in a manner which the nature of the
case, or the connection, defines more nearly. Other genitive constructions, with adjective or verb or preposition, appear to arise out
of this, by a more or less distinctly traceable connection.
b. The use of the genitive has become much extended, especially in the later language, by attribution of a noun-character to the
adjective, and by pregnant verbal construction, so that it often bears
the aspect of being a substitute for other cases — as dative, instrumental, ablative, locative.
295. The genitive in its normal adjective construction with a noun
or pronoun is classifiable into the usual varieties: as, genitive of possession
or appurtenance, including the complement of implied relation — this is,
as elsewhere, the commonest of all; the so-called partitive genitive; the
subjective and objective genitives; and so on. Genitives of apposition or
9 9 USES OF THE GENITIVE. [—297
equivalence (city of Rome), and of characteristic (man of honor), do not
occur, and hardly that of material (house of wood). Examples are: indra¬
sya vájraḥ Indra's thunderbolt; pitā putrāṇām father of sons; putraḥ
pituh son of the father; pituḥ kāma ḥ putrasya, the father's love of the
son; ke naḥ which of us; śataṁ dāsīnām a hundred female slaves.
a. The expression of possession etc. on the part of pronouns is made
almost entirely by the genitive case, and not by a derived possessive adjective (516).
b. Exceptional cases like nagarasya mārga ḥ the road to the city
(cf. le chemin de Paris), yasyā 'haṁ dūt a īpsitaḥ. (MBh.) as messenger
to whom I Kim wanted, are occasionally met with.
296. The genitive is dependent on an adjective:
a. A so-called partitive genitive with a superlative, or another word
of similar substantival value: thus, śreṣṭhaṁ vīrāṇām best of heroes;
vīrúdhāṁ vīryàvatī (AV.) of plants the mighty (mightiest) one.
h. Very often, by a transfer of the possessive genitive from noun to
adjective, the adjective being treated as if it had noun-value: thus, tasya
samah. or anurūpa ḥ or sadṛśaḥ resembling him (i. e. his like); tasya
priy ā dear to him (his dear one); tasyā 'viditam unknown to him (his
unknown thing); hávya ś carṣaṇīnām (RV.) to be sacrificed to by mortals
(their object of sacrifice) ; īpsito naranārmā m (MBh.) desired of men and
women {their object of desire); yasya kasya prasūta ḥ (H.) of whomsoever bom (his son); hantavyo 'smi na te (MBh.) I am not to be slain
of thee; k i m arthināṁ vañcayitavyam asti (H.) why should there be
a deceiving of suppliants?
c. In part, by a construction similar to that of verbs -which take a
genitive object: thus, abhijñā rājadharmāṇām (R.) understanding the
duties of a king.
297. The genitive as object of a verb is:
a. A possessive genitive of the recipient, by pregnant construction,
with verbs signifying give, impart, communicate, and the like: thus, varan
pradāy ā 'sya (MBh.) having bestowed gifts upon him (made them his by
bestowal); rājño niveditam (H.) it was made known to the king (made
his by knowledge); yad anyasya pratijñāya pLinar anyasya dīyate
(M.) that after being promised to one she is given to another. This construction, by which the genitive becomes substitute for a dative or locative,
abounds in the later language, and is extended sometimes to problematic
and difficult cases.
b. A (in most cases, probably) partitive genitive, as a less complete
or less absolute object than an accusative: thus, with verbs meaning partake
(eat, drink, etc), as píba sutásya (AV.) drink (of) thesoma; mádhva ḥ
pāyaya (RV.) cause to drink the sweet draught; — with verbs meaning
mpart(of the thing imparted) etc., as dádāt a no amṛ́tasya (RV.) bestow
upon us immortality; — with verbs meaning enjoy, be satisfied or filled
297—] I V . DECLENSION. 1 0 0
with: as, mátsy ándhasah (RV.) do thou enjoy the juice; ājyasya
pūrayanti (S.) they fill with butter; — with verbs meaning preceive,
note, care for, regard with feeling of various kinds: as, vásiṣṭhasya stu¬
vatá índro aśrot (RV.) Indra listened to Vasishtha who was praising him;
yáthā máma smárāt (AV.) that he may think of me; tasya cukopa
(MBh.) he was angry at him.
c. A genitive of more doubtful character, with verbs meaning rule
or have authority: as, tvám īśiṣe vásūnām (RV.) thou art lord of good
things; yáthā 'ham eṣā́ṁ virā́jāni (AV.) that I may rule over them;
katham mṛtyuḥ prabhavati vedaśāstravidām (M.) how has death
power over those who know the Vedas and treatises?
d. A genitive, instead of an ablative, is sometimes found used with a
verb of receiving of any kind (hearing included), and with one of fearing:
thus, yo rājñali pratigṛhṇāti lubdhasya (M.) whoever accepts a gift
from a greedy king; śṛṇu me (MBh.) learn from me; bibhīmas tava
(MBh.) we are afraid of thee.
298. A genitive in its usual possessive sense is often found as predicate, and not seldom with the copula omitted: thus, yáthā́ 'so máma
kévalaḥ. (AV.) that thou mayest be wholly mine; sarvāḥ sampattayas
tasya saṁtuṣṭaṁ yasya mānasam (H.) all good fortunes are his who
has a contented mind; — as objective predicate, bhartuh putraṁ vijā¬
nanti (M.) they recognise a son as the husband's.
299. a. The prepositional constructions of the genitive (1130) are
for the most part with such prepositions as are really noun-cases and have
the government of such: thus, agre, arthe, kṛte, and the like; also with
other prepositional words which, in the general looseness of use of the
genitive, have become assimilated to these. A few more real prepositions
take the genitive: either usually, like upári above, or occasionally, like
adhás, antár, áti.
b. A genitive is occasionally used in the older language with an
adverb, either of place or of time: thus, yátra kvà ca kurukṣetrásya
(ŚB.) in whatever part of Kurukshetra; yátra tu bhū́mer jā́yeta (MS.)
on what spot of earth he may be born; idā́nīm áhnaḥ (RV.) at this time
of the day; yásyā rā́tryāḥ prātáḥ (MS.) on the morn of what night;
āvih saṁvatsarasya (K.) twice a year. Such expressions as the last
occur also later.
300. a. The genitive is very little used adverbially; a few genitives
of time occur in the older language: as, aktos by night, vastos by day;
and there are found later such cases as kasya cit kālasya (Ś.) after a
certain time; tataḥ kālasya mahataḥ prayayāu (R.) then after a long
time he went forth.
b. A genitive, originally of possession, passing over into one of general concernment, comes in the later language (the construction is unknown
earlier) to be used absolutely, with an agreeing participle, or quite rarely
101 USES OF THE LOCATIVE. [—302
an adjective. From such cases as the following — paśyato bakamūrkha¬
sya nakulāir bhakṣitāḥ sutāḥ (H.) of the foolish heron, while he
looked on, the young were eaten by the ichneumons, or gato 'rdharātraḥ
kathāḥ kathayato mama (KSS.) half my night was passed in telling
stories, or kartavyasya karmaṇaḥ kṣipram akriyamāṇasya kālaḥ
pibati tadrasam (H.) of a work needing to be done but left undone time
quickly drinks up its essence — come into currency, by increasing independence of the genitive, such other cases as: divaṁ jagāma munīnām
paśyatāṁ tadā (R.) he went then to heaven, the ascetics looking on;
evaṁ lālapatas tasya devadūtas tadā 'bhyetya vākyam āha (MBh.)
as he thus lamented, a divine messenger coming addressed him; iti vādina
evā 'sya dhenur āvavṛte vanāt (Ragh.) while he thus spoke, the cow
came from the forest. The genitive always indicates a living actor, and the
participle is usually one of seeing or hearing or uttering, especially the
former. The construction is said by the Hindu grammarians to convey an
implication of disregard or despite; and such is often to be recognized in
it, though not prevailingly.
301. Uses ofthe Locative, a. The locative is properly the
iw-case, the case expressing situation or location; but its sphere of
use has been somewhat extended, so as to touch and overlap the
boundaries of other cases, for which it seems to be a substitute.
b. Unimportant variations ofthe sense ofin are those of amid
or among, on, and at. Of course, also, situation in time as well as
place is indicated by the case; and it is applied to yet less physical
relations, to sphere of action and feeling and knowledge, to state of
things, to accompanying circumstance; and out of this last grows
the frequent use ofthe locative as the case absolute.
c. Moreover, by a pregnant construction, the locative is used
to denote the place of rest or cessation of action or motion (into or
on to instead ofin or on; German in with accusative instead of dative:
compare English there for thither).
302. a. The locative of situation in space hardly needs illustration.
An example or two are: yé deva diví sthá (AV.) which of you gods
are in heaven; na deveṣu na yakṣeṣu tādṛk (MBh.) not among gods
or Yakshas is such a one ; párvatasya pṛṣṭhé (RV.) on the ridge of the
mountain; vidáthe santu devāh (RV.) may the gods be at the assembly;
daśame pade (MBh.) at the tenth step.
b. The locative of time indicates the point of time at which anything takes place: thus, asyā́ uṣáso vyùṣṭāu (RV.) at the shining forth
of this dawn; etasminn eva kāle (MBh.) at just that time; dvādaśe
varṣe (MBh.) in the twelfth year. That the accusative is occasionally used
in this sense, instead of the locative, was pointed out above (276 c).
c. The person with whom, instead of the place at which, one is or
remains is put in the locative; thus, tíṣṭhanty asmin paśávaḥ (MS.)
animals abide with him; gurāu vas a n
(M.) living at a teachers; and,
pregnantly, tāvat tvayi bhaviṣyāmi (MBh.) so long will I cleave to thee.
303—] I V . DECLENSION. 102
303. The locative of sphere or condition or circumstance is of very
frequent use: thus, made áhim índro jaghāna (RV.) in fury Indra slew
the dragon; mitrásya sumatāú syāma (RV.) may we be in the favor of
Mitra; te vacane ratam (MBh.) delighted in thy words.
a. This construction is, on the one hand, generalized into an expression for in the matter or case of, or with reference to, respecting, and takes
in the later language a very wide range, touching upon genitive and dative
constructions: thus, é 'mám bhaja grā́me áśveṣu góṣu (AV.) be gen¬
nerous to him in retainers, in horses, in cattle; tám it sakhitvá īmahe
(RV.) him we beg for friendship; upāyo 'yam mayā dṛṣṭa ānayane
tava (MBh.) this means was devised by me for (with reference to) bringing
thee hither; satītve kāraṇaṁ striyāḥ (H.) the cause of (in the case of)
a woman's chastity; na śakto 'bhavan nivāraṇe (MBh.) he was not
capable of preventing,
b. On the other hand, the expression by the locative of a condition
of things in which anything takes place, or of a conditioning or accompanying circumstance, passes over into a well-marked absolute construction,
which is known even in the earliest stage of the language, but becomes
more frequent later. Transitional examples are: have tvā sū́ra údite
have madhyáṁdine diváḥ (RV.) I call to thee at the arisen sun (when
the sun has risen), I call at midtime of the day; aparādhe kṛte 'pi ca
na me kopaḥ (MBh.) and even in case of an offense committed, there isno anger on my part.
c. The normal condition of the absolute construction is with a participle accompanying the noun: thus, stīrṇé barhíṣi samidhāné agnāú
(RV.) when the barhis is sfrewn and the fire kindled; kāle śubhe prāpte
(MBh.) a propitious time having arrived; avasannāyāṁ rātrāv astācala¬
cūḍāvalambini candramasi (H.) the night having drawn to a close, and
the moon resting on the summit of the western mountain.
d. But the noun may be wanting, or may be replaced by an adverbial substitute (as evam, tathā, iti) : thus, varsati when it rains [sūryej
astamite after sunset; ādityasya dṛśyamāne (S.) while there is seen
[some part] of the sun; ity ardhokte (Ś.) with these words half uttered;
asmābhiḥ samanujñāte (MBh.) it being fully assented to by us; evam
ukte kalinā (MBh.) it being thus spoken by Kali; tathā 'nuṣṭhite (H.)
it being thus accomplished. So likewise the participle may be wanting (a
copula sati or the like having to be supplied): thus, dūre bhaye the cause
of fear being remote; while, on the other hand, the participle sati etc. is
sometimes redundantly added to the other participle: thus, tathā kṛte
sati it being thus done.
e. The locative is frequently used adverbially or prepositionally (1116):
thus, -arthe or -kṛte in the matter of, for the sake of; agre in front of;
ṛte without; samīpe near.
304. The pregnant construction by which the locative comes to express the goal or object of motion or action or feeling exercised is not
103 USES OF THE LOCATIVE. [—307
uncommon from the earliest time. It is by no means to be sharply distinguished from the ordinary construction; the two pass into one another,
with a doubtful territory between. It occurs:
a. Especially with verbs, as of arriving, sending, placing, communicating, bestowing, and many others, in situations where an accusative or
a dative (or a genitive, 297 a) might be looked for, and exchangeable with
them: thus, sá id devéṣu gacchati (RV.) that, truly, goes to (to be among)
the gods; imáṁ no yajñám amṛ́teṣu dhehi (RV.) set this offering of
ours among the immortals,- yá āsiñcánti rásam óṣadhīṣu (AV.) who
pour in the juice into the plants (or, the juice that is in the plants); mā
prayacche "śvare dhanam (H.) do not offer wealth to a lord; papāta
medinyām (MBh.) he fell to (so as to be upon) the earth; skandhe kṛtvā
(H.) putting on the shoulder; saṁśrutya pūrvam asmāsu (MBh.) having
before promised us.
b. Often also with nouns and adjectives in similar constructions (the
instances not always easy to separate from those of the locative meaning
with reference to: above, 303a): thus, dayā sarvabhūteṣu compassion
toward all creatures; anurāgaṁ nāiṣadhe (MBh.) affection for the Ni¬
ṣadhan; rājā samyag vṛttaḥ sadā tvayi (MBh.) the king has always
behaved properly toward thee.
305. The prepositions construed with the locative (1126) stand to it
only in the relation of adverbial elements strengthening and directing its
meaning,
306. Declensional forms are made by the addition of
endings to the stem, or base of inflection.
a. The stem itself, however, in many words and classes
of words, is liable to variation, especially as assuming a
stronger form in some cases and a weaker in others.
b. And between stem and ending are sometimes inserted
connecting elements (or what, in the recorded condition of
the language, have the aspect of being such).
c. Respecting all these points, the details of treatment, as exhibited
by each class of words or by single words, will be given in the following
chapters. Here, however, it is desirable also to present a brief general view
of them.
307. Endings: Singular, a. In the nominative, the usual
masc. and fem. ending is s — which, however, is wanting in derivative ā and ī-stems; it is also euphonically lost (150) by consonantstems. Neuters in general have no ending, but show in this case
the bare stem; a-stems alone add m (as in the accus. masc). Among
the pronouns, am is a frequent masc. and fem. nom. ending (and is
found even in du. and pi.); and neuter3 show a form in d.
307—] I V . DECLENSION. 104
b. In the accusative, m or am Ì3 the masc. and fem, ending
—- am being added after a consonant and ṛ, and after ī and ū iu the
radical division, and m elsewhere after vowels. The neuter accusative
is like the nominative.
c The instrumental ending for all genders alike is ā. With
finali- and u-vowels, the ā is variously combined, and in the older
language it is sometimes lost by contraction with them. Stems in a
make the case end in ena (sometimes enā in V.) , and those in ā
make it end in ayā; but instances occur, in the early language, of
immediate addition of ā to both a and ā.
d. The dative ending is in general e; and with it likewise the
modes of combination of i and u final are various (and disappearance
by contraction not unknown in the oldest language). The a-stems
are quite irregular in this case, making it end in āya — excepted is
the pronominal element -sma‚ which combines (apparently) with e to
-smāi. In the personal pronouns is found bhyam (or hyam).
e. A fuller ending āi (like gen.-abl. ās and loc. ām: see below)
belongs to feminine stems only. It is taken (with interposed y) by
the great class of those in derivative ā; also by those in derivative ī,
and (as reckoned in the later language) in derivative ū. And later
it is allowed to be taken by feminine stems in radical ī and ū, and
even by those in i and u: these last have it in the earliest language
in only exceptional instances. For the substitution of āi for abl.-
gen. ās, see below, h.
f. The ablative has a special ending, d (or t), only in a-stems,
masc. and neut., the a being lengthened before it (except in the personal pronouns of 1st and 2d person, which have the same ending
at in the pi., and even, in the old language, in the dual). Everywhere else, the ablative is identical with the genitive.
g‚ The genitive of a-stems (and of one pronominal u-stem,
amu) adds sya. Elsewhere, the usual abl.-gen. ending is as; but its
irregularities of treatment in combination with a stem-final are considerable. With i and u, it is either directly added (only in the old
language), added with interposed n, or fused to es and os respectively. With ṛ (or ar) it yields ur (or us: 169b).
h. The fuller ās is taken by feminine stems precisely as āi is
taken in the dative: see above. But in the language of the Brāh¬
maṇas and Sūtras, the dative-ending āi is regularly and commonly used
instead of ās, both of ablative and of genitive. See 365 d.
I. The locative ending is i in consonant- and ṛ– and a-stems
(fusing with a to e in the latter). The i- and u-stems (unless the
final vowel is saved by an interposed n) make the case end in āu;
but the Veda has some relics or traces of the older forms (ay-i [?]
and av-i) out of which this appears to have sprung. Vedic locatives
105 CASE-ENDINGS. [—309
from i-stems end also in ā and ī. The pronominal element -sma
makes the locative -smin. Stems in an in the older language often
lose the i, and use the bare stem aslocative.
j . The ending ām is the locative correspondent to dat. āi and
abl.-gen. ās, and is taken under the same circumstances: see above.
k. The vocative (unless by accent: 314) is distinguished
from the nominative only in the singular, and not quite always there.
In a-stems, it is the unaltered stem, and so also in most consonantstems; but neuters in an and in may drop the n; and the oldest
language has sometimes a vocative in s from stems in nt and ṃs.
Stems in ṛ change this to ar. In masc. and fem. i- and u-stems, the
case ends respectively in e and o; in neuters, in the same or in i
and u. Stems in ā change ā to e; derivative ī and ū are shortened;
radical stems in long vowels use the nominative form.
308. Dual. a. The dual has — except so far as the vocative
is sometimes distinguished from nominative and accusative by a difference of accent: 314 — only three case-forms: one for nom., accus.,
and voc.; one for instr., dat., and abl.; and one for gen. and loc.
b. But the pronouns of 1st and 2d person in the older language
distinguish five dual cases: see 492b.
c. The masc. and fem. ending for nom.-accus.-voc. is in the
later language usually āu; but instead of this the Veda has prevailingly ā. Stems in ā make the case end in e. Stems in i and u,
masc. and fem., lengthen those vowels; and derivative ī in the Veda
remains regularly unchanged, though later it adds āu. The neuter
ending is only ī; with final a this combines to e.
d. The universal ending for the instr.-dat.-abl. is bhyām,
before which final a is made long. In the Veda, it is often to be
read as two syllables, bhiām.
e. The universal ending of gen.-loc. is os; before this, a and
ā alike become e (ai).
309. Plural, a. In the nominative, the general masculine
and feminine ending is as. The old language, however, often makes
the case in āsas instead of ās from a-stems, and in a few examples
also from ā-stems. From derivative ī-stems, īs instead of yas is the
regular and usual Vedic form. Pronominal a-stems make the masc.
nom. in e.
b. The neuter ending (which is accusative also) is in generali;
and before this the final of a stem is apt to be strengthened, by
prolongation of a vowel, or by insertion of a nasal, or by both. But
in the Veda the hence resulting forms in am, īni, ūni are frequently
abbreviated by loss of the ni, and sometimes by further shortening
of the preceding vowel.
309—] I V . DECLENSION. 106
c. The accusative ending is also as in consonant-stems and
in the radical division of ī- and ū-stems (and in the old language
even elsewhere). Stems in short vowels lengthen those vowels and
add in the masculine n (for ns, of which abundant traces remain),
and in the feminine s. In the neuter, this case is like the nominative.
d. In the instrumental, the case-ending is everywhere bhis
except in a-stems, where in the later language the case always ends
in āis‚ but in the earlier either in āis or the more regular ebhis
(ābhis in the two personal pronouns; and the pronominal stem a
[501] makes ebhis only).
e. The dative and ablative have in the plural the same
form, with the ending bhyas (in Veda often bhias), before which
only a is altered, becoming e. But the two personal pronouns distinguish the two cases, having for the ablative the singular ending (as
above pointed out), and for the dative the peculiar bhyam (almost
never in Veda bhiam), which they extend also into the singular.
f. Of the genitive, the universal ending is ām; which (except
optionally after radical ī and ū‚ and in a few scattering Vedic instances) takes after final vowels an inserted consonant, s in the pronominal declension, n elsewhere; before n, a short vowel is lengthened; before s, a becomes e. In the Veda, it is frequently to be
pronounced in two syllables, as a-am.
g. The locative ending is su, without any exceptions, and the
only change before it is that of a to e.
h. The vocative, as in the dual, differs from the nominative
only by its accent.
310 . The normal scheme of endings, as recognized by
the native grammarians (and conveniently to be assumed as
the basis of special descriptions), is this:
Singular. Dual. Plural,
m. f. n. in. f. n. m. f. n.
N. s — āu ī as i
A. am — āu ī as i
I. ā bhyām bhis
D . e bhyām bhyas
Ab. as bhyām bhyas
G. as os ām
L. i os su
a. It is taken in bulk by the consonantal stems and by the radical division of ī- and u-stems; by other vowel-stems, with more or
less considerable variations and modifications. The endings which
have almost or quite unbroken range, through stems of all classes,
are bhyām and os of the dual, and bhis, bhyas, ām, and su of the
plural.
107 STRONG AND WEAK STEM. [—312
311. Variation of Stem. a. By far the most important matter under this head is the distinction made in
large classes of words (chiefly those ending in consonants)
between strong and weak stem-forms — a distinction
standing in evident connection with the phenomena of accent.
In the nom. and accus. sing, and du. and the nom. pl.
(the five cases whose endings are never accented: 316a),
the stem often has a stronger or fuller form than in the
rest: thus, for example (424), ^TxTHīī rājān-am, ^l"5īī^T rājān¬
āu, ^lsU^H^rājan-as, against ‡"tt rājñ-ā and ^j5fīī^ rāja¬
bhis; or (450b) H<C(TlHJ-nahānt-am and (447) ^tiH^ adánt¬
am against H*ścli mahat-ā́ and -~rTT adat-ā. These five,
therefore, are called the cases with strong stem, or, briefly,
the strong cases; and the rest are called the cases with
weak stem, or the weak cases. And the weak cases,
again, are in some classes of words to be distinguished into
cases of weakest stem, or weakest cases, and cases of
middle stem, or middle cases: the former having endings
beginning with a vowel (instr., dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing.;
gen.-loc. du.; gen. pi.); the latter, with a consonant (inst.-
dat.-abl. du.; instr., dat.-abI., and loc. pi.).
b. The class of strong cases, as above defined, belongs
only to masculine and feminine stems. In neuter inflection,
the only strong cases are the nom.-acc. pi.; while, in those
stems that make a distinction of weakest and middle form,
the nom.-acc. du. belongs to the weakest class, and the nom.-
acc. sing, to the middle: thus, for example, compare (408)
Mc^F-d pratyáñc-i, nom.-acc. pi. neut., and 1
^fīī^īī^praty¬
áñc-as, nom. pi. masc; McfWÌ" pratīc-í, nom.-acc. du. neut.,
and 3rfteiïīī pratīc-ós, gen.-loc. du.; "TśTJpratyák, nom.-
acc. sing, neut., and ycUM*Tīī^pratyag-bhis, instr. pl.
312. Other variations concern chiefly the final vowel of a stem, and
may be mainly left to be pointed out in detail below. Of consequence
312—] I V . DECLENSION. 108
enough to mention here is only the guṇa-strengthening of a final i or u,
which in the later language is always made before as of nom. pi. and e
of dat. sing, in masc. and fem.; in the Veda, it does not always take place;
nor is it forbidden in dat. sing. neut. also; and it is seen sometimes in
loc. sing. Final ṛ has guṇa-strengthening in loc. sing.
313. Insertions between Stem and Ending. After vowel-stems,
an added n often makes its appearance before an ending. This appendage
is of least questionable origin in nom.-acc. pi. neut., where the interchange
in the old language of the forms of a- and i-stems with those of an- and
in-stems is pretty complete; and the u-stems follow their analogy. Elsewhere, it is most widely and firmly established in the gen. pl,, where in
the great mass of cases, and from the earliest period, the ending is virtually nām after a vowel. In the i - and u-stems of the later language, the
instr. sing, of masc. and neut. is separated by its presence from the fem.,
and it is in the other weakest cases made a usual distinction of neuter forms
from masculine; but the aspect of the matter in the Veda is very different:
there the appearance of the n is everywhere sporadic; the neuter shows no
special inclination to take it, and it is not excluded even from the feminine. In the ending ena from a-stems (later invariable, earlier predominating) its presence appears to have worked the most considerable transformation of original shape.
a. The place of n before gen. pi. ām is taken by s in pronominal
a- and ā-stems.
b. The y after ā before the endings āi, ās, and ām is most probably an insertion, such as is made elsewhere (258).
Accent in Declension.
314. a. As a rule without exception, the vocative, if accented
at all, is accented on the first syllable.
b. And in the Veda (the case is a rare one), whenever a syllable written
as one is to be pronounced as two by restoration of a semivowel to vowel
form, the first element only has the vocative accent, and the syllable as
written is circumflex (83—4): thus, dyāùs (i. e. díāus) when dissyllabic,
but dyāús when monosyllabic; jyake when for jíāke.
c. But the vocative is accented only when it stands at the beginning of a sentence — or, in verse, at the beginning also of a metrical division or pāda; elsewhere it is accentless or enclitic: thus,
ágne yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási (RY.) 0 Agni! whatever offering
thou protectest; but úpa tvā 'gna é 'masi (RV.) unto thee, Agni, we
come.
d. A word, or more than one word, qualifying a vocative — usually
an adjective or appositive noun, but sometimes a dependent noun in the
genitive (very rarely in any other case) — constitutes, so far as accent is
109 ACCENT. "--316
concerned, a unity with the vocative: thus (all the examples from RV.),
at the beginning of a pāda, with first syllable of the combination accented,
índra bhrātaḥ 0 brother Indra! rā́jan soma O king Soma! yáviṣṭha
dūta most youthful messenger! hótar yaviṣṭha sukrato most youthful
skilled offerer! Úrjo napāt sahasvan mighty son of strength! — in the
interior of a pāda, without accent, sómāsa indra girvaṇaḥ the Somas,
O song-loving Indra! ttv aśvinā bhadrahastā supāṇī ye, 0 Aśvins
of propitious and beautiful hands! a rājānā maha ṛtasya gopā hither,
ye two kingly guardians of great order!
e. On the other hand, two or more independent or coordinate vocatives at the beginning of a pāda are regularly and usually both accented:
thus, pítar mā́taḥ 0 father! 0 mother! ágna índra váruṇa mítra
dévāḥ Agniī Indra! Varuna! Mitra! gods! śátamūte śátakrato thou of
a hundred aids! of a hundred arts! vásiṣṭha śúkra dīdivaḥ pavaka
best, bright, shining, cleansing one! ū́rjo napād bhádraśoce son of strength,
propitiously bright one! But the texts offer occasional irregular exceptions
both to this and to the preceding rule.
f. For brevity, the vocative dual and plural will be given in the paradigms below along with the nominative, without taking the trouble to
specify in each instance that, if the latter be accented elsewhere than on
the first syllable, the accent ofthe vocative is different.
315. As regards the other cases, rules for change of accent in
declension have to do only with monosyllables and with stems of
more than one syllable which are accented on the final; for, if a stem
be accented on the penult, or any other syllable further back -— as
in sárpant, vā́ri, bhágavant, sumánas, sahásravāja — the accent
remains upon that syllable through the whole inflection (except in the
vocative, as explained in the preceding paragraph).
a. The only exceptions are a few numeral stems: see 483.
316. Stems accented on the final (including monosyllables) are
subject to variation of accent in declension chiefly in virtue of the
fact that some of the endings have, while others have not, or have
in less degree, a tendency themselves to take the accent. Thus:
a. The endings of the nominative and accusative singular and dual
and ofthe nominative plural (that is to say, of the strong cases: 311) have
no tendency to take the accent away from the stem, and are therefore only
accented when a final vowel of the stem and the vowel of the ending are
blended together into a single vowel or diphthong. Thus, from dattá come
dattāú (= dattá+āu) and dattā́s (= dattá+as); but from nadī́ come
nadyāù (= nadí+āu) and nadyàs (= nadī + as).
b. All the other endings sometimes take the accent; but those beginning
with a vowel (i. e. of the weakest cases: 311) do so more readily than
those beginning with a consonant (i. e. ofthe middle cases: 311). Thus,
from nāús come nāvā́ and nāubhís; from mahánt, however, come
mahatā́ but mahádbhis.
317—] I V . DECLENSION. 110
The general rules of accent, then, may be thus stated:
317. In the declension of monosyllabic stems, the accent falls
upon the ending in all the weak cases (without distinction of middle
and weakest): thus, nāvā́, nāubhyā́m, nāvā́m, nāuṣú; vācí, vāgbhís,
vācām, vākṣú.
a. But some monosyllabic stems retain the accent throughout: thus,
góbhis, gávām, góṣu. For such cases, see below, 350, 361 c, d, 372,
390, 427. And in the acc. pi. the stem is even oftener accented than
the ending, some words also admitting either accentuation.
318. Of polysyllabic stems ending in consonants, only a few shift
the accent to the ending, and that in the weakest (not the middle)
cases. Such are:
a. Present participles in ánt or át: thus, from tudánt, tudatā́ and
tudatós and tudatā́m; buttudádbhyām and tudátsu.
b. A few adjectives having the form of such participles, as mahatā́,
bṛhatás.
c. Stems of which the accented final loses its syllabic character by syncopation of the vowel: thus, majjñā́, mūrdhné, dāmnás (from majján
etc.: 423),
d. Other sporadic cases will be noticed under the different declensions.
e. Case-forms used adverbially sometimes show a changed accent:
see 1110ff.
319. Of polysyllabic stems ending in accented short vowels,
the final of the stem retains the accent if it retains its syllabic
identity: thus, datténa and dattā́ya from dattá; agnínā and agnáye
from agní; and also dattébhyas, agníbhis, and so on. Otherwise,
the accent is on the ending: and that, whether the final and the ending are combined into one, as in dattāís, dhenāú, agnīn, dhenū́s,
and so on; or whether the final is changed into a semivowel before
the ending: thus, dhenvā́, pitrā́, jāmyós, bāhvós, etc.
a. But ām of the gen. pi. from stems in í and ú and ṛ́ may, and
in the older language always does, take the accent, though separated by n
from the stem: thus, agnīnam, dhenūnā́m, pitṛṇā́m. In RV., even
derivative ī-stems show usually the same shift: thus, bahvīnā́m. Of
stems in á, only numerals (483 a) follow this rule: thus, saptānā́m,
daśānā́m.
320. Root-words in ī and ū as final members of compounds retain the
accent throughout, not shifting it to any of the endings. And in the older
language there are polysyllabic words in long final vowels which follow in
this respect as in others the analogy of the root-declension (below, 355 ff,).
Apart from these, the treatment of steins in derivative long vowels is, as
regards accent, the same as of those in short vowels —- save that the tone
is not thrown forward upon the ending in gen. plural.
I l l CLASSIFICATION. [—323
CHAPTE R V .
NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES.
321. a. T H E accordance in inflection of substantive
and adjective stems is so complete that the two cannot be
separated in treatment from one another.
b. They may be classified, for convenience of description, as follows:
I. Stems in -3 a;
II. Stems in ^ i and 3 u;
III. Stems in 35TT ā, | ī, and "5T u: namely, A. radicalstems (and a few others inflected like them); B. derivative
stems;
IV. Stems in ft ṛ (or ETar);
V. Stems in consonants.
c. TheTe is nothing absolute in this classification and arrangement;
it is merely believed to be open to as few objections as any other. No
general agreement has been reached among scholars as to the number and
order of Sanskrit declensions. The stems in a are here treated first because
of the great predominance of the class.
322. The division-line between substantive and adjective, always
an uncertain one in early Indo-European language, is even more
wavering in Sanskrit than elsewhere. There are, however, in all the
declensions as divided above — unless we except the stems in ṛ or
ar — words which are distinctly adjectives; and, in general, they
are inflected precisely like noun-stems of the same final: only, among
consonant-stems, there are certain sub-classes of adjective stems with
peculiarities of inflection to which there is among nouns nothing corresponding. Butthere are also two considerable classes of adjectivecompounds, requiring special notice: namely —
323. Compound adjectives having as final member a bare verbal
root, with the value of a present participle (383 a ff.): thus, su-dṛ́ś welllooking; pra-búdh foreknowing; a-druh not hating; veda-vid Vedaknowing; vṛtra-hán, Vritra-slaying; upastha-sád sitting in the lap.
Every root is liable to be used in this way, and such compounds are
not infrequent in all ages of the language: see chapter onCompouuds,
below (1269).
323--] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 1 1 2
a. This class is essentially only a special class of compound adjectives, since in the earliest Veda the simple as well as the compounded
root was sometimes used adjectively. But the compounded root was from the
beginning much more often so used, and the later the more exclusively,
so that practically the class is a separate and important one,
324. Compound adjectives having a noun as final member, but
obtaining an adjective sense secondarily, by having the idea of
possession added, and being inflected as adjectives in the three genders (1293 if.). Thus, prajā́kāmá desire of progeny, whence the adjective prajā́kāma, meaning desirous ([. e. having desire) of progeny ;
sabhārya (sa + bhāryā) having one's wife along; and so on.
a. In a few cases, also, the final noun is syntactically object of the
preceding member (1309-10): thus, atimātra immoderate (ati mātram
beyond measure); yāvayáddveṣas driving away enemies.
325. Hence, under each declension, we have to notice how a
root or a noun-stem of that declension is inflected when final member
of an adjective compound.
a. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked here that a rootword ending a compound has the accent, but (320) loses the peculiarity of monosyllabic accentuation, and does not throw the tone
forward upon the ending (except añc in certain old forms: 410).
Declension I.
Stems (masculine and neuter) in a.
326. a. This declension contains the majority of all
the declined stems of the language.
b. Its endings deviate more widely than any others
from the normal.
327. Endings: Singular, a. The nom. masc. has the normal
ending s.
b. The acc. (masc. and neut.) adds m (not am); and this form has
the office also of nom. neuter.
c. The instr. changes a to ena uniformly in the later language; and
even in the oldest Vedic this is the predominant ending (in RV., eight
ninths of all cases). Its final is in Vedic verse frequently made long (enā).
But the normal ending ā — thus, yajña, suhávā, mahitvā́ (for yajñéna
etc.) — is also not rare in the Veda.
d. The dat. has āya (as if by adding aya to a), alike in all ages
of the language.
e. The abl. has t (^or doubtless d: it is impossible from the evidence of the Sanskrit to tell which is the original form of the ending),
113 DECLENSION I., a-STEMS. [–329
before which ā is made long: this ending is found in no other noun-de¬
clension, and elsewhere only in the personal pronouns (of all numbers),
f. The gen. has sya added to the final a; and this ending is also
limited to a-stems (with the single exception of the pronoun amúṣya:
501). Its final a is in only three cases made long in the Veda; and its
y is vocalized (asia) almost as rarely.
g. The loc. ends in e (as if by combining the normal ending i with
the final of the stem), without exception.
h. The voc. is the bare stem.
328. Dual . a. The dual endings in general are the normal ones.
b. The nom., ace, and voc. masc. end in the later language always in
āu. In the Veda, however, the usual ending is simple ā (in RV., in
seven eighths of the occurrences). The same oases in the neut. end in e,
which appears to be the result of fusion of the stem-final with the normal
ending Ī.
c. The instr., dat., and abl. have bhyām (in only one or two Vedic
instances resolved into bhiām), with the stem-final lengthened to ā before it.
d. The gen. and loc. have a y inserted after the stem-final before os
(or as if the a had been changed to e). In one or two (doubtful) Vedic
instances (as also in the pronominal forms enos and yos), os is substituted for the final a.
329. Plural , a. The nom. masc. has in the later language the
normal ending as combined with the final a to ās. But in the Veda the
ending āsas instead is frequent (one third of the occurrences in RV., but
only one twenty-fifth in the peculiar parts of AV.).
b. The ace masc ends in ān (for earlier ans, of which abundant
traces are left in the Veda, and, under the disguise of apparent euphonic
combination, even in the later language: see above, 208 ff.).
c. The nom. and ace. neut. have in the later language always the
ending āni (like the an-stems: see 421; or else with n, as in the gen.
pi., before normal i). But in the Veda this ending alternates with simple
ā (which in RV. is to āni as three to two, in point of frequency; in AV.,
as three to four).
d. The instr. ends later always in āis; but in the Veda is found
abundantly the more normal form ebhis (in RV., nearly as frequent as āis;
in AV., only one fifth as frequent).
e. The dat. and abl. have bhyas as ending, with e instead of the
final a before it (as in the Vedic instr. ebhis, the loc pi., the gen. loc
du. [?], and the instr. sing.). The resolution into ebhias is not infrequent
in the Veda.
f. The gen. ends in ānām, the final a being lengthened and having
n inserted before the normal ending. The ā of the ending is not seldom
(in less than half the instances) to be read astwo syllables, aam: opinions
are divided as to whether the resolution is historical or metrical only. A
329—] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 114
very small number (half-a-dozen) of examples of simple ām as ending
instead of ānām occur in RV.
g. The loc. ends in eṣu — that is to say, with the normal ending,
before which the stem-final is changed to e (with consequent change of
s to ṣ: 180),
h. Of accent, in this declension, nothing requires to be said; the
syllable accented in the stem retains its own accent throughout.
330. Examples of declension. As examples of the
inflection of a-stems may be taken -~Tīī kāma m. love;
^ o f devá m. god; 4J!KI āsyà n. mouth.
Singular:
N. mrn^
kā́mas
A. -"F T
kā́mam
I.
kā́mena
D. ^FI W
kā́māya
Ab. ^~TrT
kā́māt
G. ~FTHT
kā́masya
L. 3Fiïīī
kā́me
V. "FT
kā́ma
Dual :
N.A.V. ^jtr
kā́māu
I.D.Ab. ohim^MIH
kā́mābhyām
G. L. WTÌīī N
k am ayos
Plural:
N.V. ^TīīTīī
kā́mās
devá s
devám
devén a
devā́ya
devā́t
devásya
devé
déva
devā ú
devā́bhyām
deváyos
devás
mm
āsyàm
āsyàm
āsyêna
āsyā̀ya
āsya t
āsyàsya
āsyê
ā́sya
āsyé
• S .
āsyàbhyām
āsyàyos
āsyani
115 DECLENSION I., a-STEMs. [-332
A . 3iï--n\
kā́mān
kā́māis
D. Ab. zm^m
kā́mebhyas
0. ^IHHIM^
kā́mānām
L.
kā́meṣu
deván
devāís
devébhya s
devā́nām
devéṣ u
āsyā̀ni
SīīFÖTT
* S
āsyāìs
āsyébhya s
*IIKIM R
āsyā̀nām
āsyêṣu
Examples of the peculiar Vedic forms are:
a. Sing.: instr. raváthenā , yajñā́ (such genitive forms as áśvasi ā
are purely sporadic).
b. Du.: nom. etc. masc. devā́; gen.-loc. pastyô s (stem pastyk).
c. PL: nom.-voc masc. devā́sas; neut. yugā́; instr. devébhis; gen.
caráthām, devā́naam.
331. Among nouns, there are no irregularities in this declension.
For irregular numeral bases in a (or an), see 483-4. For the irregularities of pronominal stems in a, which are more or less fully
shared also by a few adjectives of pronominal kindred, see the
chapter on Pronouns (495 ff.).
Adjectives.
332. Original adjectives in a are an exceedingly large class,
the great majority of all adjectives. There is, however, no such
thing as a feminine stem in a; for the feminine, the a is changed to
ā — or often, though far less often, to ī ; and its declension is then
like that of sen ā or devī (364). An example of the complete declension of an adjective a-stem in the three genders will be given
below (368).
a. Whether a masc.-neut. stem in a shall form its feminine in ā or in
ī is a question to be determined in great part only by actual usage, and
not by grammatical rule. Certain important classes of words, however, can
be pointed out which take the less common ending ī for the feminine: thus,
Ì. the (very numerous) secondary derivatives in a with vṛddhi of the first
syllable (1204): e. g. āmitrá -trī́, mā́nuṣa -ṣī, pāvamāná –nī, pāur¬
ṇamāsá -sī; 2. primary derivatives in ana with accent on the radical syllable (1150): e. g. códana -nī, saṁgráhaṇa -ṇī, subhāgaṁkáraṇ a -ṇī;
3. primary derivatives in a, with strengthening of the radical syllable, having a quasi-participial meaning: e. g. divākar á -rī, avakrāmá -mī,
332-] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 116
rathavāhá -hī́ (but there are many exceptions); 4. secondary derivatives
in maya (1225) and tana (1245 e): e. g. ayasmáya -yī; adyatana
-nī; 5. most ordinal numerals (487 h): e. g. pañcamá -mī́, navadaśá
-śī́, triṃśattamá -mī́. Not a few words make the feminine in either ā
or ī: e. g. kévalā or -lī, ugrā́ or -rī́, pāpā or -pī́, rāmā́ or -mī́; but
ordinarily only one of these is accepted as regular.
333. There are no verbal roots ending in a. But a is sometimes substituted for the final ā of a root (and, rarely, for final an),
and it isthen inflected like an ordinary adjective in a (see below, 354).
334. a. A noun ending in a, when occurring as final member
of an adjective compound, is inflected like an original adjective in a‚
making its feminine likewise in ā or ī (367).
b. For the most part, an adjective compound having a noun in a as
final member makes its feminine in ā. But there are numerous exceptions,
certain nouns taking, usually or always, ī instead. Some of the commonest
of these are as follows: akṣa eye (e. g. lohitākṣī, dvyakṣī, gavākṣī),
parṇa leaf (e. g. tilaparṇī, saptaparṇī; but ekaparṇā), mukha face
(e. g. kṛṣṇamukhī, durmukhī; but trimukhā etc.), aṅga limb, body
(e. g. anavadyāṅgī, sarvāṅgī; but caturaṅgā etc.), keśa hair (e. g,
sukeśī, muktakeśī or -śā, etc.), karṇa, ear (e. g. mahōkarṇī; but
gokarṇā etc.), udara belly (e. g. lambodarī), mūla root (e. g. pañ¬
camūlī; but oftener śatámūlā etc.). The very great majority of such
nouns (as the examples indicate) signify parts of the body.
o. On the other hand, a feminine noun ending in derivative ā
shortens its final to a to form a masculine and neuter base: see 367c.
d. In frequent cases, nouns of consonant ending are, asfinalsof compounds, transferred to the a-declension by an added suffix a (1209 a) or
ka (1222).
Declension II.
Stems (of all genders) in ^ i and 3 u.
335. The stems in ^ i and 3 u are inflected in so close
accordance with one another that they cannot be divided
into two separate declensions. They are of all the three
genders, and tolerably numerous — those in ^ i more
numerous than those in 3 u, especially in the feminine
(there are more neuters in 3 u than in ^ i).
a. The endings of this declension also differ frequently and
widely from the normal, and the irregularities in the older language
are numerous.
117 DECLENSION II., i - AND U-STEMS. [—336
336. Endings: Singular, a. The nom. masc. and fem. adds to the
stem the normal ending s. The nom. and ace neut. is the bare stem,
without ending. In the Veda, the final u of a few neuters is lengthened
(248 b): thus, urū́, purū́.
b. The ace masc and fem. adds m to the stem. Vedic forms in iam
and uam, and, with n, inam and unam, are excessively rare, and doubtful.
C The instr. fem. in the later language takes the normal ending ā
simply, while the masc. and neut. insert n before it, making inā and unā.
But in the Veda, forms in yā and vā (or iā and uā) are not infrequent
in masc. and neut. also; while inā is found, very rarely, as a fem. ending.
Moreover, fem. yā is often (in two thirds of the occurrences) contracted to
ī; and this is even sometimes shortened to i. An adverbial instr. in uyā́
from half-a-dozen stems in u occurs.
d. The dat. masc. and fem. gunates the final of the stem before the
ending e, making aye and ave. These are the prevailing endings in the
Veda likewise; but the more normal ye and ve (or ue) also occur; and
the fem. has in this case, as in the instr., sometimes the form ī for ie.
In the later language, the neuter is required in this, as in all the other
weakest cases, to insert n before the normal ending: but in the Veda
such forms are only sporadic; and the neut. dat. has also the forms aye,
ve, ave, like the other genders.
e. The abl. and gen. masc. and fem. have regularly, both earlier and
later, the ending s with gunated vowel before it: thus, es, os; and in
the Veda, the neut. forms the cases in the same way; although unas, required later, is also not infrequent (inas does not occur). But the normal
forms yas (or ias) and vas (or uas) are also frequent in both masc. and
neuter. As masc. ending, unas occurs twice in RV. The anomalous
didyót (so TS.; in the corresponding passages, vidyótVS., didyāut K.,
didivás MS.) is of doubtful character.
f. The loc. masc. and fem. has for regular ending in the later language au, replacing both finals, i and u. And this is in the Veda also the
most frequent ending ; but, beside it, the i-stems form (about half as often
in RV.) their loc. in ā: thus, ognā́; and this is found once even in the
neuter. The RV. has a number of examples of maso. and neut. locatives
in avi (the normal ending and the u gunated before it) from u-stems;
and certain doubtful traces of a corresponding ayi from i-stems. Half-adozen locatives in ī (regarded by the Vedic grammarians as progṛhya or
uncombinable: 138 d) are made from i-stems. The later language makes
the neuter locatives in ini and uni; but the former never occurs in the
oldest texts, and the latter only very rarely.
g. The later grammar allows the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. fem. to be
formed át will with the fuller fem, terminations of long-vowel stems, namely
āi, ās (for which, in Brāhmaṇa etc, āi is substituted: 307h), ām. Such
forms are quite rare in the oldest language even from i-stems (less than
40 occurrences altogether in RV.; three times as many in AV.); and from
u-stems they are almost unknown (five in RV. and AV.).
336—] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 118
h. The voc. gunates the final of the stem, in masc. and fem., alike
in the earlier and in the later language. In the neut., it is later allowed
to be either of the same form or the unaltered stem; and this was probably
the usage in the older time also; not instances enough are quotable to determine the question (AV. has u once, and VS. o once).
337. Dual. a. The later and earlier language agree in making the
nom.- acc.-voc. masc. and fem. by lengthening the final of the stem. The
same cases in the neuter (according to the rule given above) end later in
inī and unī; but these endings are nearly unknown in the Veda (as, indeed,
the cases are of only rare occurrence): AV. has inī twice (RV. perhaps
once); VS. has unī once; RV. has uī from one u-stem, and ī, once shortened to i, from one or two i-stems.
b. The unvarying ending of instr.-daf.-abl., in all genders, is bhyām
added to the unchanged stem.
c. The gen.-loc. of all ages adds os to the stem in masc. and fem.;
in neut, the later language interposes, as elsewhere in the weakest cases,
a n; probably in the earlier Vedic the form would be like that of the other
genders; but the only occurrence noted is one unos in AV.
338. Plural, a. The nom.-voc masc. and fem. adds the normal ending as to the gunated stem-final, making ayas and avas. The exceptions
in the Veda are very few: one word (ari) has ias in both genders, and a
few feminines have īs (like ī-stems); a very few u-stems have uas. The
neut nom.-acc. ends later in īni and ūni (like āni from a: 329 c); but the
Veda has ī and i (about equally frequent) much oftener than īni; and ū
and (more usually) u, more than half as often as ūni.
b. The accus. masc. ends in īn and ūn, for older īns and uns, of
which plain traces remain in the Veda in nearly half the instances of occurrence, and even not infrequently in the later language, in the guise of phonetic combination (208 ff.). The accus. fem. ends in is and ūs. But both
masc. and fem. forms in ias and uas are found sparingly in the Veda.
c. The inst. of all genders adds bhis to the stem.
d. The dat.-abl. of all genders adds bhyas (in V., almost never
bhias) to the stem.
e. The gen, of all genders is made alike in īnām and ūnām (of
which the ā is not seldom, in the Veda, to be resolved into aam). Stems
with accented final in the later language may, and in the earlier always
do, throw forward the accent upon the ending.
f. The loc. of all genders adds su (as su: 180) to the stem-final.
g. The accent is in accordance with the general rules already
laid down, and there are no irregularities calling for special notice.
339. Examples of declension. As models of i-stems
may be taken ETÍTr agní m. fire; irffl" gáti f. gait; mf^
vā́ri n. water.
119 DECLENSION II., i - AND U-STEMS. [—339
Singular:
N. ErfrjH
agnis
A. ŚFFÌÏQ
-x
agním
I. mu^i
agnínā
D. mni
agnáye
Ab. G. 3BTÖīī
agnés
L. ^īīī
agnā ú
ágne
Dual:
N. A. V . cm†
agnī́
I. D‚ Ab. *(íïl^yiH
agníbhyām
G.L. www
* \
agnyós
Plural:
N.V.
•x
agnáya s
A.
agnī́n
I. ^rfnPf"
agníbhis
D. Ab. -mi^m
agníbhya s
0. ^īīHlīī
agnīnām
L. ^TTfo
agníṣ u
īīFTīī
gátis
īīfrFT
gátim
gáty ā
gátaye , gátyā i
īīīī", īīcOTīī
gátes, gátyā s
- m īīcOTīī
gátāu, gátyām
gáte
īīrft
gátī
-TiïT^TTFf
–N
gátibhyām
gátyos
*X
gátaya s
gátīs
gátibhis
gátibhya s
jih1hih
gátīnām
īīfcTgátiṣ u
3TÍ‡
vā́ri
vā́ri
vā́riṇā
vā́riṇe
vā́riṇas
srrftf&T
vā́riṇi
vā́ri, vā́re
vā́riṇī
vā́ribhyām
vā́riṇos
^|(ÌÍU!
vā́rīṇi
^Tftfïīī
vā́rīṇi
vā́ribhis
vā́ribhyas
C||(ìmiH^
vā́rīṇām
^líï-l
vā́risu
340—] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES, 120
340. In order to mark more plainly the absence in Vedic language
of some of the forms which are common later, all the forms of Vedic occurrence are added below, and in the order of their frequency.
a. Singular, Nom. ognis etc., as above.
b. Ace: masc ogním, yayíam, ūrmíṇam(?); fem, and neut. as
above.
c. Instr.: masc ognínā, rayyā́ and ūrmiā́; fem. ácittī, ūtiā́,
matyā́, suvṛktí, dhāsínā; neut. wanting.
d. Dat.: masc. agnáye; fem. tujáye, ūtī, turyāí; neut. śúcaye.
e. Gen.-abl.: masc. ognés, ávyas, ariás; fem. ádites, hetyā́s and
bhū́miās; neut. bhū́res.
f. Loc.: masc. agnāú, agnā́, ājáyi(?L; fem. ā́gatāu, úditā, dhá¬
nasātayi(?), védī, bhū́myām; neut. apratā́, saptáraśmāu.
g. Voc: as above (neut. wanting).
h. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc.: masc. hárī; fem. yuvatī́; neut. śúcī,
máhi, háriṇī(?).
i. Instr.-daf.-abl.: as above.
j . Gen.-loc: masc. hários; fem. yuvatyós and jāmiós; neut. wanting,
k. Plural. Nom.: masc. agnáyas; fem. matáyas, bhū́mīs; neut.
śúcī, bhū́ri, bhū́rīṇi.
I. Accus.: masc. agnī́n; fem. kṣitī́s, śúcayas(?).
m. Instr., dat.-abl., and loc, as above.
n. Gen.: masc. fem. kavīnā́m, ṛ́ṣīṇaam etc. (neut. wanting).
341. As models of u-stems may be taken 5T3T śátru
m. enemy; ÌĪR dhenú f. cow; madhu n. honey.
Singular:
śátrus dhenús mádhu
A. ïīī"īī ^FPT
śátrum dhenúm mádhu
I. śr3PHT U"īī J-fcRT
o o
śàtruṇā dhenvā́ mádhunā
śátrave dhenáve, dhenvāí mádhune
Ab. G. śrín-ī i ^ m "^tīīt WJFm
śátros dhenós,dhenvā́s mádhunas
L. STÍT É-RT, ÌT"TīīT -^TR
śátrāu dhenāú, dhenvā́m mádhuni
V. Éj-TT W, Wī
śátro dhéno mádhu, mádho
121 DECLENSION II., i- AND U-STEMS. [—342
Dual:
N. A. v . tR q-Ht
śátrū dhenū́ mádhunī
I.D. Ab. ^5TVTTFT ÊH^JFT īīU^'7JTīī
o -s o *\ o -s.
śátrubhyām dhenúbhyām mádhubhyām
G.L. !īī^tī ī ÉHTĪĪ q^%T
-\ -\ O 'S.
śátrvos dhenvós mádhunos
Plural:
N.V. 5T5TSfīī 5"Tī ī īī^TH
śátravas dhenávas mádhūni
A. īīT5R ^HH īī-jft
śátrūn dhenū́s mádhūni
I. -lï^rfHīī ^Hftīī īītjfaīī
śátrubhis dhenúbhis mádhubhis
D. Ab. Sn3Fīīīī ĒR^""īī ï"^"CTīī
śátrubhyas dhenúbhyas mádhubhyas
0. SINUIIH ^FTTīī īī^RFT
śátrūṇām dhenūnā́m mádhūnām
L. ST3"J É H ~ J~J~
śátruṣu dhenúṣu mádhuṣu
342. The forms of Vedic occurrence are given here for the u-stems
in the same manner as for the i-stems above.
a. Singular. Nom.: masc. and fem. as above; neut. urú‚ urū́.
b. Accus.: masc. ketúm, ábhīruam, sucetúnam(?); fem. dhenúm.
c. Instr.: masc. ketúnā, paśvā́ and krátuā; fem. ádhenuā and
panvā́, āśuyā́; neut. mádhunā, mádhvā.
d. Dat.: masc. ketáve, śíśve; fem. śárave, íṣvāi; neut. páśve(?),
uráve, mádhune.
e. AbI.-gen.: masc. manyós, pitvás, cā́ruṇas; fem. síndhos,
ísvās; neut. mádhvas and mádhuas, mádhos, mádhunas.
f. Loc: masc. pūrāú, sūnávi; fem. síndhāu, rájjvām; neut.
sā́nāu, sā́navi, sā́no, sā́nuni*
g. Voc: as above.
h. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc: masc. and fem. as above; neut urvī,
jā́nunī.
i. Instr.-dat.-abl.: as above.
j . Gen.-loc.: as above (but vos or uos),
k. Plural, Nom.: masc. ṛbhávas, mádhuas and mádhvas; fem.
dhenávas, śatokratvas; neut. purū́ṇi, purú, purū́.
342--] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 122
I. Accus.: masc. ṛtū́n, paśvás; fem. íṣūs, mádhvas.
m, Instr., dat.-abl., and loc.‚ as above; also gen. (but with the resolution ūnaam in part).
343. Irregular declension. There are no irregular u-stems,
and only a very few i-stems.
a. Sákhi m. friend has for the five strong cases a peculiarly
strengthened base (vriddhied), namely sákhāy, which in the nom.
sing, is reduced to sákhā (without ending), and in the other cases
takes the normal endings. The instr. and dat. sing, have the normal
endings simply, without inserted n or guṇa; the abl.-gen. sing. adds
us; and the loc. sing, adds āu: the rest is like agní. Thus:
Sing, sákhā, sákhāyam, sákhyā, sákhye, sákhyus, sákhyāu,
sákhe; Du. sákhāyāu, sákhibhyām, sákhyos; Pl. sákhāyas, sákhīn,
etc. etc.
b. The Veda has usually sákhāyā du,, and often resolves the y to
i , in sákhiā, sákhius, etc The compounds are usually declined like
the simple word, unless (1315 b) sakha be substituted.
c. There is a corresponding fem., sakhī (declined like devī: 364);
but the forms of sakhi are also sometimes found used with feminine value.
d. Páti m. is declined regularly in composition, and when it has
the meaning lord, master; when uncompounded and when meaning
husband, it is inflected like sákhi in the instr., dat., abl.-gen., and
loc. sing., forming pátyā, pátye, pátyus, pátyāu. There are occasional
instances of confusion of the two classes of forms.
e. For pati as final member of a possessive compound is regularly
and usually substituted patnī in the fem.: thus, jīvapatnī having a living
husband; dāsapatnī having a barbarian for master.
f. Jáni f. wife has the gen. sing, jányus in the Veda.
g. Ari eager, greedy, hostile has in the Veda aryás in pl. nom. and
accus., masc. and fem. Its accus. sing, is arim or aryám.
h. VÍ bird has in RV. the nom. vés (beside vis). In the plural
it accents víbhis, vibhyas, but vīnā́m.
i. The stems ákṣi eye, ásthi bone, dádhi curds, and sákthi thigh,
are defective, their forms exchanging with and complementing forms from
stems in an (akṣán etc.): see the stems in an, below (431).
j . The stem pathi road is used to make up part of the inflection of
pánthan: see below, 433.
k. Króṣṭu m. jackal lacks the strong cases, for which the corresponding forms of kroṣṭṛ́ are substituted.
Adjectives.
344. Original adjective stems in i are few; those in u are much
more numerous (many derivative verb-stems forming a participial ad-
123 DECLENSION II., i- AND U-STEMS. [—346
jective in u). Their inflection is like that of nouns, and has been
included in the rules given above. In those weak cases, however —
namely, the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing., and the gen.-loc. dual —
in which neuter nouns differ from masculines in the later language
by an inserted n (we have seen above that this difference does not
exist in the Veda), the neuter adjective is allowed to take either
form. The stem is the same for masculine and neuter, and generally
(and allowably always) for feminine also.
a. There are a few instances of a feminine noun in ī standing (sometimes with changed accent) beside a masculine in i : thus, krími m., krimī́
f.; sákhi (343 a) m., sakhī́ f.; dundubhí m., dundubhī f.; dhúni
m., dhunī f.; śakúni m., śakunī or -ni f. In the later language, especially, there is a very frequent interchange of i and ī as finals of the same
stem. No adjective in i makes a regular feminine in ī.
b. With stems in u the case is quite different. While the feminine
may, and in part does, end in u, like the masculine and neuter, a special feminine-stem is often made by lengthening the u to Ū, or also by
adding Ī; and for some stems a feminine is formed in two of these three
ways, or even in all the three: thus, kārū, -dipsū́, śundhyū́, cariṣṇū́,
vacasyū́; -aṇvī, urvī, gurvī, pūrvī (with prolongation of u before r:
compare 245 b), bahvī, prabhvī, raghvī́, sādhvī́, svādvī́; — pṛthú
and pṛthvī́, vibhū́ and vibhvī́, mṛdú and mṛdvī́, laghu and laghvī,
vásu and vásvī; babhrú and babhrū́, bībhatsú and bībhatsū́, bhīrú
and bhīrū; — tanú and tanū́ and tanvī́, phalgú and phalgū́ and
phalgvī, mádhu and madhū́ and mádhvī. There are also some feminine noun-stems in ū standing (usually with changed accent) beside masculines in u: thus, ágru m., agrū́ f.; kádru m., kadrū́ f.; gúggulu
m,, guggulū́ f.; jatu m., jatū́ f.; pṛ́dāku m., pṛdākū́ f.
345. Roots ending in i or u (or ṛ: 376 b) regularly add a t when
used as root-words or as root-finals of compounds; and hence there
are no adjectives of the root-class in this declension.
a. Yet, in the Veda, a few words ending in a short radical u are
declined as if this were suffixal: thus, ásmṛtadhru, suṣṭú; and the A V.
has pṛtanājí (once). Roots in ū sometimes also shorten ū to u: thus,
prabhú, vibhú, etc. (354); go (361 e) becomes gu in composition; and
re perhaps becomes ri (361 e); while roots in ā sometimes apparently
weaken ā to i (in -dhi from √dhā etc.: 1155),
346. Compound adjectives having nouns of this declension as
final member are inflected in general like original adjectives of the
same endings.
a. But in such compounds a final i or u is sometimes lengthened to
form a feminine stem: thus, suśroṇī, svayonī or -ni, -gātrayaṣṭī
or -ṭi; vāmorū or -ru, durhaṇū or-ṇu, varatanū, mātṛbondhū; and
RV. has áśiśvī from śíśu.
347—] V . NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 1 2 4
Declension III.
Stems in long vowels: ETT ā, ^ ī, ~7 ū.
347. The stems ending in long vowels fall into two
well-marked classes or divisions: A. monosyllabic stems —
mostly bare roots — and their compounds, with a comparatively small number of others inflected like them; B. derivative feminine stems in 3BTT ā and ^ ī, with a small number in
—
ū which in the later language have come to be
inflected like them. The latter division is by far the larger
and more important, since most feminine adjectives, and
considerable classes of feminine nouns, ending in Eft ā or
^ ī‚ belong to it.
A. Root-words, and those inflected like them.
348. The inflection of these stems is by the normal
endings throughout, or in the manner of consonant-stems
(with EFF^am, not ^ m, in the accus. sing.); peculiarities
like those of the other vowel-declensions are wanting. The
simple words are, as nouns, with few exceptions feminine;
as adjectives (rarely), and in adjective compounds, they are
alike in masculine and feminine forms. They may, for convenience of description, be divided into the following subclasses :
1. Root-words, or monosyllables having the aspect of such.
Those in ā are so rare that it is hardly possible to make up a whole
scheme of forms in actual use; those in ī and ū are more numerous,
but still very few.
2. Compounds having such words, or other roots with long final
vowels, as last member.
3. Polysyllabic words, of various origin and character, including
in the Veda many which later are transferred to other declensions.
4. As an appendix to this class we may most conveniently
describe the half-dozen stems, mostly of regular inflection, ending in
diphthongs.
125 DECLENSION III., ā-, ī-, AND Ū-STEMS. [—351
349. Monosyllabic stems. Before the endings beginning
with vowels, final ī is changed to iy and ū to uv; while final ā is
dropped altogether, except in the strong cases, and in the acc. pi.,
which is like the nominative (according to the grammarians, ā is
lost here also: no instances of the occurrence of such a form appear
to be quotable). Stems in ī and ū are in the later language allowed
to take optionally the fuller endings āi, ās, ām in the singular (dat.,
abl.-gen., loc); but no such forms are ever met with in the Veda
(except bhiyāí [?], RV., once). Before ām of gen. pi., n may or may
not be inserted; in the Veda it is regularly inserted, with a single
exception (dhiyā́m, once). The vocative is like the nominative in
the singular as well as the other numbers; but instances of its occurrence in uncompounded stems are not found in the Veda, and must
be extremely rare everywhere. The earlier Vedic dual ending is ā
instead of āu.
350. To the ī- and ū-stems the rules for monosyllabic accent
apply: the accent is thrown forward upon the endingsin all the weak
cases except the accus. pi., which is like the nom. But the a-stems
appear (the instances are extremely few) to keep the accent upon
the stem throughout.
351. Example s of declension. As models of monosyllabic inflection we may take xTT jā́ f. progeny; śf† dhí
f. thought; and ^bh ū f. earth.
a. The first of these is rather arbitrarily extended from the four cases
which actually occur; of the loc. sing, and gen.-loc. du., no Vedic examples
from ā-stems are found.
Singular:
N. XTTĪĪ tfta m
jā́s dhī́s bhū́s
A. xTPT faīīīī W T
jam dhíyam bhuvam
I. xiï FTīīT 5~7
O
jā́ dhiyā́ bhuvā́
D. ÌT fäīī, fm >rf
je dhiyé, dhiyāí bhuve‚bhuvai
Ab. G. ~T īīí7Jīī/fWTīī -~[īī, *~f~T
- S * \ - X O - X O \
jás dhiyás, dhiyā́s bhuvás,bhuvā́s
L. §r fàfo, íuīīFr -rf%, H"īīī
-X O O -X
jí dhiyí, dhiyā́m bhuví, bhuvā́m
v. STITĪ ^xīī m
-X - \ C\- X
jā́s dhī́s bhū́s
351— Y . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 126
Dual:
N. A. V. §TT
jāú
I.D. Ab. Sn-3TFT
-x
jā́bhyām
O.L. _Tfīī
*x
jós
Plural:
N. 5TTīī
jā́s
A. ~fīī (TO?)
-X -X
jā́s, jás
I. SIH% T
*x
jā́bhis
D. Ab. siï^Tīī
– N
jā́bhyas
O. síHTīī īīTīī?)
–x -x
jā́nām, jā́m
L. xTO
o
jā́su
m
dhíyāu
•x
dhībhyā́m
dhiyós
īīJīīīī
•x
dhíyas
-x
dhíyas
-X
dhībhís
•x
dhībhyás
īīJ"īīī, ^faīīT
dhiyā́m, dhīnā́m
o
dhīsú
o
bhúvāu
GX -X
bhūbhyā́m
o -x
bhuvós
O "X
bhúvas
bhúvas
W
* \ -X
bhūbhís
<rx -X
bhūbhyás
O "x ff\ -x
bhuvā́m,bhūnā́m
cx‚o
bhūṣú
Masc. and fem. Singular:
N. V. -dhīs -bhū́s
A. -dhíyam -dhyàm -bhúvam -bhvàm
I. -dhíyā -dhya -bhúvā -bhva
D. -dhíye -dhyé -bhúve -bhvê
Ab. G. -dhíyas -dhyàs -bhúvas -bhvàs
L. -dhíyi -dhyì -bhúvi -bhvì
352. Monosyllabic stems in composition. When the
nouns above described occur asfinal member of a compound, or when
any root in ā or ī or ū is found in a like position, the inflection of
an ā-stem is as above. But ī and ū–stems follow a divided usage:
the final vowel before a vowel-ending is either converted into a short
vowel and semivowel (iy or uv, as above) or into a semivowel simply
(y or v). The accent is nowhere thrown forward upon the endings;
and therefore, when ī and ū become y and v, the resulting syllable
is circumflex (83—4). Thus:
127 DECLENSIO N III., ā-, ī-, A N D Ū-STEMS. [—354
Dual:
N. A. V. -dhíyāu -dhyāù -bhúvāu -bhvāù
I. D. Ab. -dhī́bhyām -bhū́bhyām
G. L. -dhíyos -dhyôs -bhúvos -bhvôs
Plural:
N. A. V. -dhíyas -dhyàs -bhúvas -bhvàs
I. -dhībhis -bhū́bhis
D. Ab. -dhībhyas -bhū́bhyas
G. í-dhíyām . , m
í-bhúvām _ fehvà m
(-dhmam l-bhunam
L. -dhíṣu -bhū́ṣu
a. As to the admissibility of the fuller endings āi, ās, and ām in the
singular (feminine), grammatical authorities are somewhat at variance; but
they are never found in the Veda, and have been omitted from the above
scheme as probably unreal.
b. If two consonants precede the final ī or ū, the dissyllabic forms,
with iy and uv, are regularly written; after one consonant, the usage is
varying. The grammarians prescribe iy and uv when the monosyllabic stem
has more the character of a noun, and y and v when it is more purely a
verbal root with participial value. No such distinction, however, is to be seen
in the Veda — where, moreover, the difference of the two forms is only
graphic, since the yā- and vā-forms and the rest are always to be read as
dissyllabic: iā or īā and uā or ūā, and so on.
c. As to neuter stems for such adjectives, see 367.
353. A few further Vedic irregularities or peculiarities may be briefly
noticed.
a. Of the ā-stems, the forms in ās, am, ā (du.) are sometimes to
be read as dissyllables, aas, aam, aa. The dative of the stem used as
infinitive is āí (as if ā́+ e): thus, prakhyāí, pratimāí, parādāí.
b. Irregular transfer of the accent to the ending in compounds is seen
in a case or two: thus, avadyabhiyā́ (RV,), ādhiā́ (AV.).
354. But compounds of the class above described are not infrequently transferred to other modes of inflection: the ā shortened
to a for a masculine (and neuter) stem, or declined like a stem of
the derivative ā-class (below, 364) as feminine; the ī and ū shortened to i and u‚ and inflected as of the second declension.
a. Thus, compound stems in -ga, -ja, -da, -stha, -bhu, and others, are
found even in the Veda, and become frequent later (being made from all, or
nearly all. the roots in ā); and sporadic cases from yet others occur: for example,
śṛtapā́n, vayodhāís and ratnadhébhis, dhanasāís (all RV.); and,
from ī and ū compounds, veṣaśrís (TS.), áhrayas (RV.), gaṇaśríbhis
(RV.), karmaṇís (ŚB.) and ṛtaníbhyas (RV.) and senāníbhyas (VS.)
and grāmaṇíbhis (TB.), supúnā (AV.), śitibhráve (TS.).
b. Still more numerous are the feminines in ā which have lost
356--] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 128
their root-declension: examples are projá (of which the further compounds
in part have root-forms), svadhā́, śraddhā́, pratimā́, and others.
c. Then, in the later language, a few feminines in ī are made from
the stems in a shortened from ā: thus, gopī, goṣṭhī, pannagī, paṅkajī,
bhujagī, bhujaṁgī, surāpī.
355. Polysyllabic Stems. Stems of this division (A) of more
than one syllable are very rare indeed in the later language, and
by no means common in the earlier. The Rig-Veda, however, presents a not inconsiderable body of them; and as the class nearly
dies out later, by the disuse of its stems or their transfer to other
modes of declension, it may be best described on a Vedic basis.
a. Of stems in ā, masculines, half-a-dozen occurin the Veda: pánthā,
mánthā, and ṛbhukṣā́ are otherwise viewed by the later grammar: see
below, 433—4; uśánā (nom. pr.) has the anomalous nom. sing, uśánā
(and loc. as well as daf. uśáne); mohā́ great is found only in accus.
sing, and abundantly in composition; ā́tā frame has only ā́tāsu not derivable from ā́ta.
b. Of stems in ī, over seventy are found in the Veda, nearly all
feminines, and all accented on the final. Half of the feminines are formed
from masculines with change of accent: thus, kalyāṇī́ (m. kalyā́ṇa),
puruṣí (m. púruṣa); others show no change of accent: thus, yamī́ (m.
yamá); others still have no corresponding masculines : thus, nadī́, lakṣmī́,
sūrmī́. The masculines are about ten in number: for example, rathī,
prāvī́, starī́, ahī́, āpathī́.
c Of stems in ū, the number is smaller: these, too, are nearly all
feminines, and all accented on the final. The majority of them are the
feminine adjectives in ū́ to masculines in ú or u (above, 344b): thus,
caraṇyū́, cariṣṇū́, jighatsū́, madhū́. A few are nouns in ū́, with
change of accent: thus, ogrū́ (ágru), pṛdākū́ (pṛ́dāku), śvaśrū́ (śvá¬
śura); or without change, as nṛtū́. And a few have no corresponding
masculines: thus, tanū́, vadhū́, camū́. The masculines are only two or
three: namely, prāśū́, kṛkadāśū́, makṣū́(?); and their forms are of the
utmost rarity.
356. The mode of declension of these words may be illustrated
by the following examples: rathī́ m. charioteer; nadi i. stream; tanū́
f. body.
a. N O one of the selected examples occurs in all the forms; forms
for which no example at all is quotable are put in brackets. No loo. sing,
from any ī-stem occurs, to determine what the form would be. The stem
nadī is selected as example partly in order to emphasize the difference
between the earlier language and the later in regard to the words of this
division: nadī́ is later the model of derivative inflection.
1 2 9 DECLENSIO N III., RADICA L ā-, ī-, A N D Ū-STEMS. [—358
Singular :
N. rathī́s nadīs tanū́s
A. rathíam nadíam tanúam
I. rathíā nadíā tanúā
D. rathíe nadíe tanúe
Ab. G. rathías nadías tanúas
L, tanúi
V. ráthi (?) nádi tánu
Dual:
N. A. V. rathíā nadíā tanúā
I. D. Ab. [rathībhyām] nadībhyām [tanū́bhyām]
G. L. [rathíos] nadíos tanúos
Plural:
N, A. rathías nadías tanúas
I. [rathī́bhis] nadībhis tanū́bhis
D. Ab. [rathī́bhyas] nadī́bhyas tanū́bhyas
G. rathī́nām nadī́nām tanū́nām
L. [rathī́ṣu] nadī́ṣu tanū́ṣu
b. The cases — nadíam, tanúam, etc. — are written above according to their true phonetic form, almost invariably belonging to them in
the Veda; in the written text, of course, the stem-final is made a semivowel, and the resulting syllable is circumflexed : thus, nadyàm, tan¬
vàm, etc.; only, as usual, after two consonants the resolved forms iy and
uv are written instead; and also where the combination yv would otherwise result: thus, cakríyā, [agrúvāij and mitrāyúvas. The RV. really
reads staryàm etc. twice, and tanvàs etc. four times; and such contractions are more often made in the A V. The ending ā of the nom.-accvoc. du. is the equivalent of the later āu. The nom. sing, in s from
ī-stems is found in the older language about sixty times, from over thirty
stems.
357. Irregularities of form, properly so called, are very few in this
division: camū́ as loc. sing, (instead of camvi) occurs a few times; and
there is another doubtful case or two of the same kind; the final ū́ isregarded as pragṛhya or uncombinable (138); tanúi is lengthened to tanvī
in a passage or two; -yúvas is once or twice abbreviated to -yū́s.
358. The process of transfer to the other form of Ī- and ū-declension
(below, 362 ff,), which has nearly extinguished this category of words in
the later language, has its beginnings in the Veda; but in RV. they are
excessively scanty: namely, dūtiā́m, loc. sing., once, and śvaśruā́m, do.,
once, and dravitnuā́, instr. sing., with two or three other doubtful cases.
In the Atharvan, we find the acc. sing, kuhū́m, tanū́m, vadhū́m; the
instr. sing, palāliā́ and one or two others; the dat. sing, vadhvāí, śva¬
śruāí, agrúvāi; the abl.-gen. sing, punarbhúvās, pṛdākuā́s, śvaśruā́s;
and the loc. sing, tanúām (with anomalous accent). Accusatives plural
in is and ūs are nowhere met with.
359—] V. NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 1 3 0
359. Adjective compounds from these words are very few; those which
occur are declined like the simple stems: thus, híraṇyavāśīs and sahás¬
rastarīs, átaptatanūs and sárvatanūs, all nom. sing, masculine.
Stems ending in diphthongs.
360. There are certain monosyllabic stems ending in diphthongs,
which are too few and too diverse in inflection to make a declension
of, and which may be most appropriately disposed of here, in connection with the stems in ī and ū, with which they have most affinity.
They are:
a. stems in āu: nāú and glāú;
b. stems in āi: rāí;
c. stems in o : gó and dyó (or dyú, dívj.
361. a. The stem nāú f. ship is entirely regular, taking the
normal endings throughout, and following the rules for monosyllabic
accentuation (317) —except that the accus. pi. is said (it does not
appear to occur in accented texts) to be like the nom. Thus: nāús,
nā́vam, nāvā́, nāvé, nāvás, nāví; nā́vāu, nāubhyā́m, nāvós; nā́vas,
nā́vas, nāubhís, nāubhyás, nāvā́m, nāuṣú. The stem glāú m. ball
is apparently inflected in the same way; but few of its forms have
been met with in use.
b. The stem rāí f. (or m.) wealth, might be better described as
rā with a union-consonant y (258) interposed before vowel endings,
and is regularly inflected as such, with normal endings and monosyllabic accent. Thus : rā́s, rā́yam, rāyā́, rāyé, rāyás, rāyí; rā́yāu,
rābhyā́m, rāyós; rā́yas, rāyás, rābhís, rābhyás, rāyā́m, rāsú. Bui
in the Veda the accus. pi. is either rāyás or rā́yas; for accus. sing,
and pi. are also used the briefer forms rā́m (RV. once: rā́yam does
not occur in V.) and rā́s (SV., once); and the gen.-sing. is sometimes
anomalously accented rā́yas.
c. The stem gó m. or i. bull or cow is much more irregular.
In the strong cases, except accus. sing., it is strengthened to gāú,
forming (like nāú) gāús, gā́vāu, gā́vas. In accus. sing, and pi. it
has (like rāí) the brief forms gā́m and gas. The abl.-gen. sing, is
gós (as if from gu). The rest is regularly made from go, with the
normal endings, but with accent always remaining irregularly upon
the stem: thus, gávā, gave, gávi, gávos, gávām; góbhyām, góbhis,
góbhyas, góṣu. In the Veda, another form of the gen. pi. is gónām;
the nom. etc. du. is (as in all other such cases) also gā́vā; and gam,
gós, and gas are not infrequently to be pronounced as dissyllables.
As acc. pi. is found a few times gāvas.
d. The stem dyó f. (but in V. usually m.) shy, day is yet more
anomalous, having beside it a simpler stem dyu, which becomes div
before a vowel-ending. The native grammarians treat the two as
131 DECLENSIO N III., DIPHTHONGA L STEMS. [---362
independent words, but it is more convenient to put them together.
The stem dyó is inflected precisely like go, as above described. The
complete declension is as follows (with forms not actually met with
in use bracketed):
Singular. Dual. Plural.
N. dyāús K r _ , _t divas dyā́vas
A. dívam dyā́m JVaU
-
y 9 A a
divás, dyū́n [dyā́s]
I. divā́ [dyávā] | dyúbhis [dyóbhis]
D. divé dyáve [[dyúbhyām dyóbhyām] J dyóbhyas]
Ab. divás dyós J )
L J f
^
y
^
J
G. divás dyós ^ r ‚ r -. [divā́m dyávām]
L. diví dyávi j - dyúṣu [dyóṣu]
e. The dat. sing, dyáve is not found in the early language. Both
divas and divas occur as accus. pi. in V. As nom. etc. du., dyā́vā is,
as usual, the regular Vedic form: once occurs dyávī (du.), as if a neuter
form; and dyāús is found once used as ablative. The cases dyāus, dyām,
and dyūn (once) are read in V. sometimes as dissyllables; and the first
as accented vocative then becomes dyāùs (i. e. díāus: see 314).
f. Adjective compounds having a diphthongal stem as final member
are not numerous, and tend to shorten the diphthong to a vowel. Thus,
from nāu we have bhinnanu; from go, several words like águ, saptágu,
sugu, bor hugú (f. -gū́ JB.); and, correspondingly, rāi seems to be reduced to ri in bṛhádraye and ṛdhádrayas (RV.). In derivation, go maintains its full form in gotra, agótā, -gava (f. -gavī), etc.; as first member
of a compound, it is variously treated: thus, gávāśir, gáviṣṭi (but
gaāśir, gaïṣṭi K.), etc.; goaśvá or go'śva, góṛjīka, góopaśa, etc.
In certain compounds, also, dyu or dyo takes an anomalous form: thus,
dyāurdā (K.), dyāurloká (ŚB.), dyāúsaṁśita (AV,). In revánt
(unless this is for rayivant) rāi becomes re. RV. has ádhrigāvas from
ádhrigu (of questionable import); and AV, has ghṛtastā́vas, apparently
accus. pi. of ghṛtastú or -stó.
B. Derivative stems in ā, ī‚ ū.
362. To this division belong all the ā and ī-stems
which have not been specified above as belonging to the
other or root-word division; and also, in the later language,
most of the ī and ū-stems of the other division, by transfer
to a more predominant mode of inflection. Thus:
I. a. The great mass of derivative feminine ā-stems, substantive
and adjective.
b. The inflection of these stems has maintained itself with little
change through the whole history of the language, being almost precisely
the same in the Vedas as later.
362—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 1 3 2
2. c. The great mass of derivative feminine ī-stems.
d. This class is without exception in the later language. In the earlier,
it suffers the exception pointed out above (355 b): that feminines made
with change of accent follow this mode of declension only when the accent
is not on the ī́: thus, táviṣī, páruṣṇī, páliknī, róhiṇī.
e. The ī-stems of this division in general are regarded as made by
contraction of an earlier ending in yā. Their inflection has become in the
later language somewhat mixed with that of the other division, and so far
different from the Vedic inflection: see below, 363 g.
f. Very few derivative stems in ī are recognized by the grammarians
as declined like the root-division; the Vedic words of that class are, if
Tetained in use, transferred to this mode of inflection.
g. A very small number of masculine ī-stems (half-a-dozen) are in
the Veda declined as of the derivative division: they are a few rare proper
names, mā́talī etc.; and rā́ṣṭrī and sirī́ (only one case each).
3. h. The ū-stems are few in number, and are transfers from the
other division, assimilated in inflection to the great class of derivative
ī-stems (except that they retain the ending s of the nom. sing.).
363. Endings. The points of distinction between this and the
other division are as follows:
a. In nom. sing, the usual s-ending is wanting: except in the ū-stems
and a very few ī-stems — namely, lakṣmī, tarī, tantrī, tandrī — which
have preserved the ending of the other division.
b. The accus. sing, and pi. add simply m and s respectively.
c. The dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing, take always the fuller endings
āi‚ ās, ām; and these are separated from the final of the ā-stems by an
interposed y. In Brāhmaṇa etc. ‚ āi is generally substituted for ās (307 h),
d. Before the endings ā of instr. sing, and os of gen.-loc. du., the
final of ā-stems is treated as if changed to e; but in the Veda, the instr.
ending ā very often (in nearly half the occurrences) blends with the final
to ā. The yā of ī-stems is in a few Vedic examples contracted to Ī, and
even to i. A loc. sing, in ī occurs a few times.
e. In all the weakest cases above mentioned, the accent of an Ī- or
ū-stem having acute final is thrown forward upon the ending. In the
remaining case of the same class, the gen. pi., a n is always interposed
between stem and ending, and the accent remains upon the former (in RV.,
however, it is usually thrown forward upon the ending, as in i and u-stems),
f. In voc. sing., final ā becomes e; final ī and ū are shortened.
g. In nom.-acc.-voc. du. and nom. pi. appears in ī (and ū)-stems a
marked difference between the earlier and later language, the latter borrowing the forms of the other division. The du. ending āu is unknown in
RV., and very rare in AV. ; the Vedic ending is ī (a corresponding dual
of ū-stems does not occur). The regular later pi. ending as has only a
1 3 3 DECLENSIO N III., DERIVATIV E ā-, ī-, A N D Ū-STEMS. [—364
doubtful example or two in RV., and a very small number in A V. • the
case there (and it is one of very frequent occurrence) adds s simply; and
though yas-forms occur in the Brāhmanas, along with īs-forms, both are
used rather indifferently as nom. and accus. (as, indeed, they sometimes
interchange also in the epics). Of ā-stems, the du. nom. etc. ends in e,
both earlier and later; in pi., of course, s-forms are indistinguishable from
as-forms. The RV. has a few examples of āsas for as.
h. The remaining cases call for no remark.
364. Example s of declension. As models of the
inflection of derivative stems ending in long vowels, we
may take CRT sénā f. army; "FETT kanyā f. girl; "^eft deví
f. goddess; c^vadh ū f. woman.
Singular:
-
t
"
x
"
s
sénā kanya devī vadhū́s
A. FRTīī 3FÜÍW "Mī ī -OT
sénām kanyàm devī́m vadhū́m
I. VFTŪĪ 3FUUn ^~TT T-“T
sénayā kanyàyā devyā́ vadhvā́
D. WĪĪĪÌ 3RJTTT " ^ " W^T
sénāyāi kanyàyāi devyāí vadhvāíAb. G. wnrm ^mm Ì^JĪĪ Ī w<*m
sénāyās kanyàyās devyā́s vadhvā́s
L. ĪHWM ^FīīīīTTīī "^TTĪ Ī W^FÏ
sénāyām kanyāyām devyā́m vadhvā́m
séne kánye dévi vádhu
Dual:
N. A.v. HĪĪ ^FU ^nì
séne kanyé devyāù vadhvāù
I.D. Ab. TOJīīl OTF5Tīī Ì^Vui H ^"Tī ī
sénābhyām kanyā̀bhyām devī́bhyām vadhū́bhyām
G.L . wvm ^Fuvm ~ætm w^m
sénayos kanyàyos devyós vadhvós
364—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 134
Plural:
N. V. Wm efrUIH IcTj - ôT"íīī
sénās kanyas devyàs vadhvàs
A. wm ^RJTīī ^fìīī 3"īī
sénās kanyas devī́s vadhū́s
I. īī^TÌHīī ^RTTPTīī Míìī ī ^ÍT-Tīī
sénābhis kanyabhis devī́bhis vadhū́bhis
D. Ab. īī"RTīī ^RTFīīī ī "5MVU H ^T^TITT
sénābhyas kanyābhyas devībhyas vadhū́bhyas
G. ÍWMIH -*rUMIH 1 ^HIH ^qTFT
sénānām kanyānām devī́nām vadhū́nām
L. WīīS 3FOTīī "Mf a ~ ~
sénāsu kanyasu devī́ṣu vadhū́ṣu
a. In the Veda vadhū́ is a stem belonging to the other division
(like tanū́, above, 356).
365. Examples of Vedic forms are:
a. ā-stems: instr. sing, manīṣā́ (this simpler form is especially common from stems in tā and iā); nom. pi. vaśā́sas (about twenty examples);
accus. pi. araṁgamā́sas (a case or two). Half the bhyas-cases are to
be read as bhias; the ām of gen. pi. is a few times to be resolved into
aam; and the ā and ām of nom. and accus. sing, are, very rarely, tt> be
treated in the same manner.
b. ī-stems: instr. sing, śámī, śámi; loc. gaurī́; nom. etc. du. devī́;
nom. pi. devī́s; gen. pi. bohvīnā́m. The final of the stem is to be read
as a vowel (not y) frequently, but not in the majority of instances: thus,
deviā́, deviā́s, deviā́m, ródasios.
c. The sporadic instances of transfer between this division and the
preceding have been already sufficiently noticed.
d. Of the regular substitution made in the Brāhmaṇa language (307 g,
336 g, 363 c) of the dat. sing, ending āi for the gen.-abl. ending ās, in
all classes of words admitting the latter ending, a few examples may be
given here : abhibhūtyāi rūpam (AB.) a sign of overpowering; triṣṭubhaś
ca jagatyāi ca (AB.) of the metres tristubh and jagatī; vāco dāivyāi
ca mānuṣyāi ca (AA.) of speech, both divine and human,- striyāi payah
(AB.) woman's milk; dhenvāí vā́ etád rétah (TB.) that, forsooth, is the
seed of the cow; jīrṇāyāi tvacaḥ (KB.) of dead skin; jyāyasī yājyāyāi
(AB.) superior to the yājyā; asyāi divo 'smād antarikṣāt (ŚŚS.) from
this heaven, from this atmosphere. The same substitution is made once in
the AY.: thus, svápantv asyāi jñātáyaḥ let her relatives sleep.
135 DECLENSIO N III., DERIVATIV E ā-, ī-, A N D Ū-STEMS . [—368
366. The noun strī́ f. woman (probably contracted from sūtrī generatrix), follows a mixed declension: thus, strī́, stríyam or strī́m, striyā́,
striyāí, striyā́s, striyā́m, strí; stríyāu, strībhyā́m, striyós; stríyas,
stríyas or strīs, strībhís, strībhyás, strīṇā́m, strīṣú (butthe accusatives strīm and strīs are not found in the older language, and the voc
stri is not quotable). The accentuation is that of a root-word; the forms
(conspicuously the nom. sing.) are those of the other or derivative division.
Adjectives.
367. a. The occurrence of original adjectives in long final
vowels, and of compounds having asfinalmember a stem of the first
division, has been sufficiently treated above, so far as masculine and
feminine forms are concerned. To form a neuter stem in composition,
the rule of the later language is that the final long vowel be shortened; and the stem so made is to be inflected like an adjective in
i or u (339, 341, 344).
b. Such neuter forms are very rare, and in the older language almost
unknown. Of neuters from ī-stems have been noted in the Veda only
hariśríyam, acc. sing, (a masc. form), and suādhías, gen. sing, (same
as masc. and fem.); from ū-stems, only a few examples, and from stemforms which might be masc. and fem. also: thus, vibhú, subhú, etc. (nom.-
acc. sing.: compare 354); supúā and mayobhúvā, instr. sing.; and
mayobhú, acc. pi. (compare purú: 342 k); from ā-stems occur only halfa-dozen examples of a nom. sing, in ās, like the masc. and fem. form.
c. Compounds having nouns of the second division as final
member are common only from derivatives in ā; and these shorten
the final to a in both masculine and neuter: thus, from a not and
prajā progeny come the masc. and neut. stem apraja, fem. aprajā
childless. Such compounds with nouns in ī and ū are said to be inflected in masc. andfem.like the simple words (only with īn and ūn
in acc. pi. masc); but the examples given by the grammarians are
fictitious.
d. Stems with shortened final are occasionally met with: thus, eka¬
patni, āttalakṣmi; and such adverbs (neut sing, accus.) as upabhāimi,
abhyujjayini. The stem strī is directed to be shortened to stri for all
genders.
368. It is convenient to give a complete paradigm,
for all genders, of an adjective-stem in a. We take for
the purpose Wt pāpá evil, of which the feminine is usually made in ETT ā in the later language, but in ^ ī in the
older.
368--] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 1
Singular:
m. n.
N. ~ ~ “ 3Tīīīī
pāpá s pāpá m
A. qp~T
pāpá m
I. T F H
pāpén a
D. qT~nj
pāpā́y a
Ab. q-fF f
pāpā́t
0« mmj
pāpásy a
I, qfq
pāp é
V. qrtr
pap a
Dual:
N. A. V. qpRT t7jq
pāpā ú pāp é
I. D. Ab. t-qiVTnīī
pāpā́bhyā m
G.L. qiWī ī
pāpáyo s
Plural:
N. QMIH TPTÍ H
pāpā́s pāpā́n i
A. qFT H -^T H
pāpā́n pāpā́n i
I. *TFTīī
pāpāí s
D. Ab. MlVuH
•s.
pāpébhya s
f.
~ Tf
pāpā ́
pāpā m
TT“JT
pāpáy ā
TFTīīJ
pāpā́yā i
TOJlīī
pāpā́yā s
m~īīTīī
pāpā́yā s
pāpā́yā m
T R
pā́p e
-TR
pāp é
pāpā́bhyā m
pāpáyo s
īīīīīīīī
pāpā́s
pāpā́s
pāpā́bhis
qTqT^"īīTT
pāpā́bhya s
f.
TTTT
pāpī́
TīīÍTīī
pāpí m
~"~JT
pāpy a
Tīī-7T
pāpyā í
MIU4M
pāpyā́s
qT"JTīī
pāpyā́s
pāpya m
pā́p i
-ĪĪQTT
pāpyā ù
qT^TTTīī
pāpī́bhyā m
pāpyó s
pāpyà s
pāpī́s
pāpībhi s
pāpíbhya s
137 DECLENSIO N IV. , ṛ-STEMS . [—371
MIMMIH
pāpā́nām
o
pāpésu
pāpānām
-Tīīīīīī
o
pāpā́su
MIMÌHIH
pāpīnām
MltfÌN
o
pāpīṣu
Declension IV.
Stems in ṛ (or ~ ~ ar).
369. This declension is a comparatively limited one,
being almost entirely composed of derivative nouns formed
with the suffix r" tṛ (or rTf tar), which makes masculine
nomina agentis (used also participially), and a few nouns of
relationship.
a. But it includes also a few nouns of relationship not made
with that suffix: namely devṛ́ m., svásṛ and nánāndṛ i.; and, besides
these, nṛ́ m., stṛ́ (in V.) m., usṛ́ (in V.) f., savyaṣṭhṛ m., and the
feminine numerals tisṛ and catasṛ (for which, see 482 e,g). The
feminines in tṛ are only mātṛ́, duhitṛ́, and yā́tṛ.
b. The inflection of these stems is quite closely analogous with
that of stems in i and u (second declension); its peculiarity, as
compared with them, consists mainly in the treatment of the stem
itself, which has a double form, fuller in the strong cases, briefer in
the weak ones.
370. Forms of the Stem. In the weak cases (excepting the
loc. sing.) the stem-final is ṛ‚ which in the weakest cases, or before
a vowel-ending, is changed regularly to r (129). But as regards the
strong cases, the stems of this declension fall into two classes: in
one of them — which is very much the larger, containing all the
nomina agentis, and also the nouns of relationship náptṛ and svásṛ,
and the irregular words stṛ́ and savyaṣṭhṛ — the ṛ is vriddhied, or
becomes ār; in the other, containing most of the nouns ofrelationship,
with nṛ́ and usṛ́, the ṛ is gunated, or changed to ar. In both classes,
the loc. sing, has ar as stem-final.
371. Endings. These are in general the normal, but with the
following exceptions:
a. The nom. sing. (masc. and fem.) ends always in ā (for original
ars or ārs). The voc. sing, ends in ar.
b. The accus. sing, adds am to the (strengthened) stem; the accus.
pi. has (like i and u-stems) n as masc. ending and s as fem. ending, with
the ṛ lengthened before them.
G.
L.
371—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 138
c. The abl.-gen. sing, changes ṛ to ur (or us: 169b),
d. The gen. pi. (as in i and u-stems) inserts n before ām, and
lengthens the stem-final before it. But the ṛ of nṛ́ may also remain short.
e. The above are the rules of the later language. The older presents
certain deviations from them. Thus:
f. The ending in nom.-acc-voc du. is (as universally in the Veda)
regulariy ā instead of āu (only ten āu-forms in RV.).
g. The i of loc. sing, is lengthened to Ī in a few words: thus, kartárī.
h. In the gen. pl,, the RV. has once svásrām, without inserted n;
and narā́m instead of nṛṇā́m is frequent.
i. Other irregularities of nṛ́ are the sing. dat. náre, gen. náras, and
loc. nári. The Veda writes always nṛṇā́m in gen. pi., but its ṛ is in a
majority of cases metrically long.
j . The stem usṛ́ f. dawn has the voc. sing, uṣar, the gen. sing,
usrás; and the accus. pi. also usrás, and loc. sing, usrā́m (which is
metrically trisyllabic : usṛā́m), as if in analogy with ī and ū-stems. Once
occurs usri in loc. sing., but it is to be read as if the regular trisyllabic
form, uṣári (for the exchange of s and ṣ, see 181 a),
k. From stṛ́ come only tā́ras (apparently) and stṛ́bhis.
I. In the gen.-loc. du,, the r is almost always to be read as a separate syllable, ṛ‚ before the ending os: thus, pitṛós, etc On the contrary,
nánāndari is once to be read nánāndri.
m. For neuter forms, see below, 375.
372. Accent. The accentuation follows closely the rules for
i- and u-stems: if on the final of the stem, it continues, as acute, on
the corresponding syllable throughout, except in the gen. pi., where
it may be (and in the Veda always is) thrown forward upon the
ending; where, in the weakest cases, ṛ becomes r, the ending has the
accent. The two monosyllabic stems, nṛ́ and stṛ́, do not show the
monosyllabic accent: thus (besides the forms already given above),
nṛ́bhis, nṛ́ṣu.
373. Example s of declension. As models of this
mode of inflection, we may take from the first class (with
ETf~ ār in the strong forms) the stems 3Tcí dātṛ́ m. giver
and F-Tīī svásṛ f. sister; from the second class (with 3~~
ar in the strong forms), the stem FTcT pitṛ m. father.
Singular:
N. 3TcTT ~fīīT fàcTT
dātā́ svásā pitā́
A. WW{ facrś^
dātaram svásāram pitáram
139 DECLENSIO N IV. , ṛ-STEMS . [—373
I. "T“ T F-T~T fà~T
dātrā ́ svásr ā pitrā ́
D. ^T5T T^īī
dātr é svásr e pitr é
A*.G. S T ™ T—C ft"
dātú r svásu r pitú r
L. -jrrít F-mft fàcri‡
dātár i svásar i pitár i
v . — ṛ T^īī ^ W T
dā́ta r svása r píta r
Dual:
N.A.V . 37rTTfr F-TīīīfT TīīcTft
dātā́rā u svásārā u pitárā u
I.D. Ab. ^TrT^TTīī HHUIï H ÍWP T
dātṛ́bhyā m svásṛbhyā m pitṛ́bhyā m
G.L. ^TÍTīī F^TRTTT ft"^Tīī
dātró s svásro s pitró s
Plural:
N.v . W"" ^ WUI ^ ftīī^
dātā́ra s svásāra s pitára s
A. ttft FqFT" f-FR
dātṛ n svásṛs pitṛ n
I. 3JcTftīī F^īīPTīī fàcTPC —S C -N C –\
dātṛ́bhis svásṛbhis pitṛ́bhis
D. Ab. 5J^Tfī ī HWUI W fàcFīīīī
dātṛ́bhya s svásṛbhya s pitṛ́bhya s
0. "cTīīīīīī F3TTīīīīīī TWnFT
dāt ́ ṝ ṇ a m svás ́ ṝ ṇ ā m pit ́ ṝ ṇ á m
L. ^TcT" F~R" ftTcT"
V CO CO CO
dātṛ́ṣ u svásṛṣ u pitṛ́ṣ u
a. The feminine stem qiH mātṛ́, motherì is inflected precisely like fàcT pitṛ́, excepting that its accusative plural is
iTRTīī^māt́ṝ́s.
373—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 140
b. The peculiar Vedic forms have been sufficiently instanced above;
the only ones of other than sporadic occurrence being the nom. etc. du.
dātā́rā, svásārā, pitárā, and the gen. pi. of nṛ, narā́m.
c The nom. pi. forms pitaras and mātaras etc. are found used
also as accus. in the epics.
374. The stem kroṣṭṛ́ m. jackal (lit'ly howler) substitutes in the
middle cases the corresponding forms of króṣṭu.
375. Neuter forms. The grammarians prescribe a complete
neuter declension also for bases in tṛ, precisely accordant with that
of vā́ri or mádhu (above, 339, 341). Thus, for example:
Sing. Du. Plur.
N. A. dhātṛ́ dhātṛ́ṇī dhātṛṇi
I. dhātṛ́ṇā dhātṛ́bhyām dhātṛ́bhis
G. dhātṛ́ṇas dhātṛ́ṇos dhātṛṇā́m
V. dhā́tṛ, dhā́tar dhā́tṛṇī dhā́tṛṇi.
a. The weakest cases, however (as of i- and u-stems used ad¬
jectively: 344), are allowed also to be formed like the corresponding
masculine cases: thus, dhātrā́ etc.
b. No such neuter forms chance to occur in the Veda, but they begin
to appear in the Brāhmaṇas, under influence of the common tendency
(compare Germ. Better, Retterin; Fr. menteur,* menteuse) to give this
nomen*agentis a more adjective character, making it correspond in gender
with the noun which it (appositively) qualifies. Thus, we have in
TB. bhartṛ́ and janayitṛ́, qualifying ántárikṣam; and bhartṛṇi and
janayitṛṇi, qualifying nákṣatrāṇi; as, in M . , grahītṛm, qualifying
indriyāṇi.
c. "When a feminine noun is to be qualified in like manner, the usual
feminine derivative in ī is employed: thus, in TB., bhartryàs and bhar¬
tryāù, janayitryàs and janayitryāù, qualifying ā́pas and ahorātré;
and such instances are not uncommon.
d. The RV. shows the same tendency very curiously once in the accus.
pi. mātṛn, instead of mātṛs, in apposition with masculine nouns (RV.
x. 35.2).'
e. Other neuter forms in RV. are sthātúr gen. sing., dhmātárī
loc. sing.; and for the nom.sing., instead of-tṛ, a few more or less doubtful cases, sthātar, sthātúr, dhartári.
Adjectives.
376. a. There are no original adjectives of this declension: for
the quasi-adjectival character ofthe nouns composing it, see above
(375 b). The feminine stem is made by the suffix ī: thus, dātrī,
dhātrī́.
b. Roots ending in ṛ (like those in i and u: 345) add a t to
make a declinable stem, when occurring as final member of a com-
1 4 1 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANT-STEMS . [—379
pound: thus, karmakṛ́t (√kṛ), vajrabhṛ́t (√bhṛ), balihṛ́t (√hṛ). From
some ṛ-roots, also, are made stems in irandur: see below, 383 a, b.
c. Nouns in ṛ as finals of adjective compounds are inflected
in the same manner as when simple, in the masculine and feminine;
in the neuter, they would doubtless have the peculiar neuter endings
in nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers.
d. But TS. has once tvátpitāras, nom. pi., having thee for father.
Declension V.
Stems ending in Consonants.
377. A llstems ending in consonants may properly be
classed together, as forming a single comprehensive declension ; since, though some of them exhibit peculiarities of
inflection, these have to do almost exclusively with the stem
itself, and not with the declensional endings.
378. In this declension, masculines and feminines of
the same final are inflected alike; and neuters are peculiar
as usually in the other declensions) only in the nom.-acc.-
voc. of all numbers.
a. The\ majority of consonantal stems, however, are not
inflected in the feminine, but form a special feminine derivative stem in ^ ī (never in a), by adding that ending to
the weak form of the masculine.
b. Exceptions are in general the stems of divisions A and B
— namely, the radical stems etc., and those in as and is and us.
For special cases, see below.
379. Variations, as between stronger and weaker forms,
are very general among consonantal stems: either of two
degrees (strong and weak), or of three (strong, middle, and
weakest): see above, 311.
a. The peculiar neuter forms, according to the usual
rule (311b), are made in the plural from the strong stem, in
singular and dual from the weak — or, when the gradation
is threefold, in singular from the middle stem, in dual
from the weakest.
379—] Y . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 142
b. As in the case of stems ending in short vowels (āsyàni,
vā́rīṇi, mádhūni, dātṛm, etc.), a nasal sometimes appears in the
special neuter plural cases which is found nowhere else in inflection.
Thus, from the stems in as, is, us, the nom.-acc.-voc. pi. in –āṃsi,
-īṃṣi, -ūṃṣi are very common at every period. According to the
grammarians, the radical stems etc. (division A) are treated in the
same way; but examples of such neuters are of extreme rarity in the
language; no Vedic text offers one, and in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras
have been noted only -hunti (AB. vii. 2. 3), -vṛnti (PB. xvi. 2. 7 et al.\
-bhāñji (KB. xxvii. 7), -bhṛ́nti (ŚB.viii. 1. 3-), and -yuñji (LŚS. ii. 1.8);
while in the later language is found here and there a case, like
-śrunti (Ragh.), -pūṃṣi (Śiś.); it may be questioned whether they are
not later analogical formations.
380. The endings are throughout those given above
(310) as the "normal".
a. By the general law as tofinals(150), the s of the nom. sing,
masc. and fem. is always lost; and irregularities of treatment of the
final of the stem in this case are not infrequent.
b. The gen. and abl. sing, are never distinguished in form from
one another — nor are, by ending, the nom. and accus. pi.: but these
sometimes differ in stem-form, or in accent, or in both.
381. Change in the place of the accent is limited to monosyllabic stems and the participles in ánt (accented on the final). For
details, see below, under divisions A and E.
a. But a few of the compounds of the root añc or ac show an irregular
shift of accent in the oldest language: see below, 410.
382. a. For convenience and clearness of presentation,
it will be well to separate from the general mass of consonantal stems certain special classes which show kindred peculiarities of inflection, and may be best described together.
Thus:
B. Derivative stems in as, is, us;
C. Derivative stems in an (an, man, van);
D. Derivative stems in in (in, min, vin);
E. Derivative stems in ant (ant, mant, vant);
F. Perfect active participles in vans;
G-. Comparatives in yāṃs or yas.
b. There remain, then, to constitute division A , especially radical stems, or those identical in form with roots.
143 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTA L ROOT-STEMS . [—383
together with a comparatively small number of others which
are inflected like these.
They will be taken up in the order thus indicated.
A. Root-stems, and those inflected like them.
383. The stems of this division may be classified as
follows:
I. a. Root-stems, having in them no demonstrable element added
to a root: thus, ṛ́c verse, gir song, pad foot, díś direction, máh (V.)
great.
b. Such stems, however, are not always precisely identical in form
with the root: thus, vā́c from √vac, sráj from √sṛj, mū́ṣ from √muṣ,
vríś from √vraśc (?), úṣ from √vas shine; — from roots in final ṛ
come stems in ir and ur: thus, gír, ā-śír, stir; júr, túr, dhúr, pur,
múr, stúr, sphúr; and psúr from √psar.
c. With these may be ranked the stems with reduplicated root, as
cikít, yavīyúdh, vánīvan, sasyád.
d. Words of this division in uncompounded use are tolerably frequent
in the older language: thus, in RV. are found more than a hundred of
them; in AV., about sixty; but in the classical Sanskrit the power of
using any root at will in this way is lost, and the examples are comparatively few. In all periods, however, the adjective use as final of a compound is very common (see below, 401).
e. As to the infinitive use of various cases of the root-noun, see 971.
II. f. Stems made by the addition of t to a final short vowel
of a root.
g. No proper root-stem ends in a short vowel, although there are
(354) examples of transfer of such to short-vowel-declensions; but i or
u or r adds a t to make a declinable form: thus, -jit, -śrút, -kṛ́t.
Rootsin ṛ, however, as has just been seen (b), also make stems in ir or ur.
h. As regards the frequency and use of these words, the same is true
as was stated above respecting root-stems. The Veda offers examples of
nearly thirty such formations, a few of them (mit, rít, stút, hrút, vṛ́t,
and dyút if this is taken from dyu) in independent use. Of roots in ṛ,
t is added by kṛ, dhṛ, dhvṛ, bhṛ, vṛ, sṛ, spṛ, hṛ, and hvṛ. The roots
gā (or gam) and han also make –gát and -hat by addition of the t to
an abbreviated form in a (thus, adhvagát, dyugát, dvigat, navagát,
and saṁhát).
III. i . Monosyllabic (also a few apparently reduplicated) stems
not certainly connectible with any verbal root in the language, but
having the aspect of root-stems, as containing no traceable suffix:
383—] V . NOUNS A N D ADJECTIVES . 1 4 4
thus, tvác shin, path road, hṛ́d heart, áp and vár water, dvár door,
ā́s mouth, kakúbh and kakúd summit.
j . Thirty or forty such words are found in the older language, and
some of them continue in later use, while others have been transferred to
other modes of declension or have become extinct.
k. Stems more or less clearly derivative, but made with suffixes
of rare or even isolated occurrence. Thus:
I. derivatives (v.) from prepositions with the suffix vat: arvāvát,
āvát, udvát, nivát, parāvát, pravát, saṁvát; — 2. derivatives (V.)
n tat (perhaps abbreviated from tāti), in a few isolated forms: thus,
uparátāt, devátāt, vṛkátāt, satyátāt, sarvátāt; —3. other derivatives in t preceded by various vowels: thus, daśát, vehát, vahát, sravát,
saścát, vāghát; nápāt; taḍít, divít, yoṣít, rohít, sarít, harít;
marút; yákṛt, śákṛt; and the numerals for 30, 40, 50, triṃśát etc.
(475); — 4. stems in ad: thus, dṛṣád, dhṛṣád, bhasád, vanád,
śarád, samád; — 5. stemsin j preceded by various vowels: thus, tṛṣṇáj,
dhṛṣáj, sanáj, bhiṣáj; uśíj, vaṇíj, bhurij, nmij(?); ásṛj; — 6. a
few stems ending in a sibilant apparently formative: thus, jñā́s, -das,
bhā́s, mā́s, bhī́ṣ; —7. a remnant of unclassifiable cases, such as viṣṭáp,
vípāś, kápṛth, śurúdh, iṣídh, pṛkṣúdh, ragháṭ (?), sarágh, visrúh,
uṣṇíh, kaváṣ.
384. Gender. The root-stems are regularly feminine as women
actionis, and masculine as nomen agentis (which is probably only a
substantive use of their adjective value: below, 400). But the feminine noun, without changing its gender, is often also used concretely:
e. g., druh f. (√druh be inimical) means harming, enmity, and also
harmer, hater, enemy —thus bordering on the masculine value. And
some of the feminines have a completely concrete meaning. Through
the whole division, the masculines are much less numerous than the
feminines, and the neuters rarest of all.
a. The independent neuter stems are hṛ́d (also -hard), dám, vā́r,
svàr, mā́s flesh, ā́s mouth, bhā́s, dós (with which may be mentioned
the indeclinables śám and yos); also the apparent derivatives yákṛt,
śákṛt, kápṛth, ásṛj.
385. Strong and weak stem-forms. The distinction of these two classes of forms is usually made either
by the presence or absence of a nasal, or by a difference
in the quantity of the stem-vowel, as long or short; less
often, by other methods.
386. A nasal appears in the strong cases ofthe following words:
1. Compounds having as final member the root ac or añc: see below,
407 ff.; and RV. has once uruvyáñcam from root vyac; — 2. The
145 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTA L STEMS . [—389
stem yuj, sometimes, in the older language: thus, nom. sing, yúṃ (for
yúṅk), accus. yúñjam, du. yúñjā (but also yújam and yújā); —
3. The stem -dṛś, as final of a compound in the older language; but only
in the nom. sing, masc, and not always: thus, anyādṛ́ṃ, īdṛ́ṃ, kīdṛ́ṃ,
tādṛ́ṃ, etādṛṃ, sadṛ́ṃ and pratisadṛ́ṃ: but also īdṛ́k, tādṛ́k, svardṛ́k,
etc.; — 4. For path and puṁs, which substitute more extended stems,
and for dant, see below, 394—6.
387. The vowel a is lengthened in strong cases as follows:
1. Of the roots vac, sac, sap, nabh, śas, in a few instances (V.),
at the end of compounds; — 2. Of the roots vah and sah, but irregularly:
see below, 403—5; — 3. Of ap water (see 393); also in its compound
rītyàp; — 4. Of pad foot: in the compounds of this word, in the later
language, the same lengthening is made in the middle cases also; and in
RV. and AV. the nom. sing. neut. is both -pat and -pāt, while RV. has
once -pāde, and -pādbhis and -pātsu occur in the Brāhmaṇas; — 5. Of
nas nose (? nā́sā nom. du. fem., RV., once); — 6. Sporadic cases (V.)
are: yāj(?), voc. sing.; pāthás and -rāpas, accus. pi.; vánīvānas,
nom. pi. The strengthened forms bhāj and raj are constant, through all
classes of cases.
388. Other modes of differentiation, by elision of a or contraction of the syllable containing it, appear in a few stems:
i. In -hon: see below, 402; — 2. In kṣam (V.), along with prolongation of a: thus, kṣā́mā du., kṣā́mas pi.; kṣamā́ instr. sing., kṣámi
loc. sing., kṣmás abl. sing.; — 3. In dvā́r, contracted (V.) to dur in
weak cases (but with some confusion of the two classes); — 4. In svar,
which becomes, in RV., sūr in weak cases; later it is indeclinable.
389. The endings are as stated above (380).
a. Respecting their combination with the final of the stem, as
well as the treatment of the latter when it occurs at the end of the
word, the rules of euphonic combination (chap. III.) are to be consulted; they require much more constant and various application
here than anywhere else in declension.
b. Attention may be called to a few exceptional cases of combination
(V.): mādbhís and mādbhyás from mā́s month; the wholly anomalous
paḍbhís (RV. and VS.: AV. has always padbhis) from pad; and saráṭ
and saráḍbhyas corresponding to a nom. pi. sarághas (instead of saráh¬
as: 222). Don is apparently for dám, by 143 a.
c. According to the grammarians, neuter stems, unless they end in a
nasal or a semivowel, take in nom.-acc.-voo. pi. a strengthening nasal before
the final consonant. But no such cases from neuter noun-stems appear
ever to have been met with in use; and as regards adjective stems ending
in a root, see above, 379 b.
390—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 146
390. Monosyllabic stems have the regular accent of such, throwing the tone forward upon the endings in the weak cases.
a. But the accusative plural has its normal accentuation as a
weak case, upon the ending, in only a minority (hardly more than a
third) ofthe stems: namely in datás, pathás, padás, nidás, apás,
uṣás, jñāsás, puṁsás, māsás, mahás; and sometimes in vācás,
srucás, hrutás, sridhás, kṣapás, vipás, durás, iṣás, dviṣàs, druhás
(beside vā́cas etc.).
b. Exceptional instances, in which a weak case has the tone on the
stem, occur as follows: sádā, nádbhyas, tánā (also tanā́) and táne,
bā́dhe (infln.), ráṇe and ráṃsu, váṃsu, sváni, vípas, kṣámi, sū́rā
and sū́ras (but sūré), áṃhas, and vánas and bṛ́has (in vánaspáti,
bṛ́haspáti). On the other hand, a strong case is accented on the ending
in mahàs, nom. pl,, and kāsám (AV.: perhaps a false reading). And
preṣā́, instr. sing., is accented as if préṣ were a simple stem, instead of
pra-íṣ. Vimṛdháh is of doubtful character. For the sometimes anomalous accentuation of stems in ac or añc, see 410.
391. Example s of inflection. As an example of
normal monosyllabic inflection, we may take the stem
5fT^vāe f. voice (from √~^vac, with constant prolongation);
of inflection with strong and weak stem, i ~ :
pad m. foot;
of polysyllabic inflection, R"ŚrT^marút m. wind or wind-god;
of a monosyllabic root-stem in composition, trivṛ́t
three-fold, in the neuter. Thus:
Singular:
N. V. 5fFīī TfcT TOT T^RrT
vā́k pā́t marút trivṛ́t
A. -TT"í^ °TŚrTīī f^"T^
vā́cam pā́dam marútam trivṛ́t
I. 5TFTT t-j q~FTT ĪWīī
vācā́ padā́ marútā trivṛ́tā
D. SFFĪ ^ fö^H
vācé padé marúte trivṛ́te
Ab. G. ^Tīī^ -"īī^ q"Ś"īī^ fà"TO
vācás padás marútas trivṛ́tas
I.. srrí% q ^ ; f^^Í H
vācí padí marúti trivṛ́ti
147 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTAL STEMS . [--391
Dual:
N.A.V. cnft –fïtt -TŚrīt f^rsjrft
vā́cāu pā́dāu marútāu trivṛ́tī
I.D. Ab. "jr^TTFT q-fTīī RT^TTīī f^^Tïī ī
vāgbhyā́m padbhyā́m marúdbhyām trivṛ́dbhyām
G. L. — ^ qsjīī^ H^rïÌH^ MNHÌ ^
vācós padós marútos trivṛ́tos
Plural:
N.v. -TFT ^ q i ^ q^rT^ fsRf a
vā́cas pā́das marútas trivṛ́nti
vācás, vā́cas padás marútas trivṛ́nti
I. snfPTīī qfer qrfer Nciu^
vāgbhís padbhís marúdbhis trivṛ́dbhis
D. Ab. -T^F T q"Tīī RT~Tīī Br~lTīī
vāgbhyás padbhyás marúdbhyas trivṛ́dbhyas
G. STRTīī^ H^dlH^ M-jHIH^
vācā́m padā́m marútām trivṛ́tām
L. ~í~ ~ ~ -Tprīī ÍWīī
vākṣú patsú marútsu trivṛ́tsu
By way of illustration of the leading methods of treatment of
a stem-final, at the end of the word and in combination with caseendings, characteristic case-forms of a few more stems are here
added. Thus:
a. Stems in j : yuj-class (219a‚ 142), bhiṣáj physician: bhiṣák,
bhiṣájam, bhiṣágbhis, bhiṣákṣu; — mṛj-class (219b, 142), samrā́j
universal ruler: samrā́ṭ, samrā́jam, samrā́ḍbhis, samrā́ṭsu.
b. Stems in dh: -vṛ́dh increasing: -vṛ́t, -vṛ́dham, -vṛ́dbhis,
vṛ́tsu; -búdh (155) waking: -bhút, -búdham, -bhúdbhis, -bhútsu.
c. Stems in bh: -stúbh praising: -stúp, -stúbham, -stúbbhis,
-stúpsu.
d. Stems in ś: díś (218a, 145) direction: dík, díśam, digbhís,
dikṣú; — víś (218, 145) the people: víṭ, víśam, viḍbhís, viṭsú (V.
vikṣú: 218a).
e. Stems in ṣ (226b, 145): dvíṣ enemy: dvíṭ, dvíṣam, dviḍ¬
bhís, dviṭsú.
f. Stems in h: duh-class (232—3 a, 155 b, 147), -dúh milkt
391—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 1 4 8
yielding: -dhúk, -dúham, -dhúgbhis, -dhúkṣu; — ruh-class (223b,
147), -lih licking: -liṭ, -liham, -liḍbhis, -liṭsu.
g. Stems in m (143a, 212a: only praśā́n, nom. sing., quotable):
-śām quieting: -śan, śā́mam, -śā́nbhis, -śā́nsu.
392. The root-stems in ir and ur (383 b) lengthen their vowel
when the final r is followed by another consonant (245 b), and also
in the nom. sing, (where the case-ending s islost).
a. Thus, from gir i. song come gī́r (gī́ḥ), gíram, girā́, etc.;
gírāu, gīrbhyā́m, girós; gíras, gīrbhís, gīrbhyás, girā́m, gīrṣú
(165); and, in like manner, from pur f. stronghold come pū́r (pū́h),
púram, purā́, etc.; púrāu, pūrbhyā́m, purós; púras, pūrbhís, pūr¬
bhyás, purā́m, pūrṣú.
b. There are no roots in is (except the excessively rare pis) or in
us; but from the root śās with its ā weakened to i (250) comes the
noun āśís f. blessing, which is inflected like gir: thus, āśī́s (āśī́ḥ),
āśíṣam, āśíṣā, etc.; āśíṣāu, āśī́rbhyām, āśíṣos; āśíṣas, āśī́rbhis,
āśī́rbhyas, āśíṣām, āśī́ḥṣu. And sajū́s together is apparently a stereotyped nominative of like formation from the root juṣ. The form aṣṭā́prūṭ
(TS.), from the root-stem pruṣ, is isolated and anomalous.
c. These stems in ir, ur, is show a like prolongation of vowel also
in composition and derivation: thus, gīrvāṇa, pūrbhíd, dhūrgata,
dhūstva, āśīrdā́, āśī́rvant, etc. (but also gírvan, gírvaṇas),
d. The native grammar sets up a class of quasi-radical stems like
jigamis desiring to go, made from the desiderative conjugation-stem (1027),
and prescribes for it a declension like that of āśís: thus, jigamīs, jiga¬
miṣa, jigamīrbhis, jigamīḥṣu, etc. Such a class appears to be a mere
figment of the grammarians, since no example of it has been found quotable
from the literature, either earlier or later, and since there is, in fact, no
more a desiderative stem jigamis than a causative stem gamay.
393. The stem áp I. wateris inflected only in the plural, and
with dissimilation of its final before bh to d (151 e j: thus, ā́pas,
apás, adbhís, adbhyás, apā́m, apsú.
a. But RV. has the sing, instr. apā́ and gen. apás. In the earlier
language (especially AV,), and even in the epics, the nom. and accus. pi.
forms are occasionally confused in use, ā́pas being employed as accus.,
and apás as nominative.
b. Besides the stem ap, case-forms of this word are sometimes used
in composition and derivation: thus, for example, abja, āpodevata,
āpomáya, apsumant.
394. The stem púṁs m. man is very irregular, substituting
púmāṃs in the strong cases, and losing its s (necessarily) before
initial bh of a case-ending, and likewise (by analogy with this, or
by an abbreviation akin with that noticed at 231) in the loc. plural.
The vocative is (in accordance with that of the somewhat similarly
1 4 9 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTA L STEMS . [—398
inflected perfect participles: see 462 a) púman in the later language,
but pumas in the earlier. Thus: púmān, púmāṃsam, puṁsā́,
puṁsé, puṁsás, puṁsí, púman; púmāṃsāu, pumbhyā́m, puṁsós;
púmāṃsas, puṁsás, pumbhís, pumbhyás, puṁsā́m, puṁsú.
a. The accentuation of the weak forms, it will be noticed, is that of
a true monosyllabic stem. The forms with bh-endings nowhere occurin the
older language, nor do they appear to have been cited from the later.
Instances of the confusion of strong and weak forms are occasionally met
with. As to the retention of S unlingualized in the weakest oases (whence
necessarily follows that in the loc pi.), see 183 a.
b. This stem appears under a considerable variety of forms in composition and derivation: thus, as puṁs in puṁścalī́, puṁstva, púṁs¬
vant, -puṁska, etc.; as pum in púṁvatsa, púṁrūpa, puṁvat,
pumartha, etc.; as puṁsa in puṁsavont; — at the end of a compound,
either with its full inflection, as in strīpúṁs etc.; or as puṁsa, in
strīpuṁsa, mahāpuṁsa; or as puma in strīpuma (TS. TA.).
395. The stem path m. road is defective in declension, forming
only the weakest cases, while the strong are made from pánthā or
pánthan, and the middle from pathi: see under an-stems, below, 433.
396. The stem dánt m. tooth is perhaps of participial origin,
and has, like a participle, the forms dánt and dát, strong and weak :
thus (V.), dán, dántam, data, etc.; datás acc. pi. etc. But in the
middle cases it has the monosyllabic and not the participial accent:
thus, dadbhís, dadbhyás. In nom. pi. occurs also -datas instead
of -dantas. By the grammarians, the strong cases of this word are
required to be made from dánta.
397. A number of other words of this division are defective,
making part of their inflection from stems of a different form.
a. Thus, hṛ́d n. heart, mā́ṃs or mā́s n. meat, mā́s m. month, nás
f. nose, niś f. night (not found in the older language), pṛ́t f. army, are
said by the grammarians to lack the nom. of all numbers and the accus.
sing, and du. (the neuters, of course, the acc pi. also), making them
respectively from hṛ́daya, māṃsá, [mā́sa, nā́sikā, niśā, pṛ́tanā. But
the usage in the older language is not entirely in accordance with this
requirement: thus, we find mas flesh accus. sing.; mā́s month nom.sing.;
and nā́sā nostrils du. From pṛ́t occurs only the loc. pi. pṛtsú and (RV.,
once) the same case with doublejending, pṛtsúṣu.
398. On the other hand, certain stems of this division, allowed
by the grammarians a full inflection, are used to fill up the deficiencies of those of another form.
a. Thus, ásṛj n. blood, śákṛt n. ordure, yákṛt n. liver, dós n.
(also m.) fore-arm, have beside them defective stems in an: see below,
432. Of none of them, however, is anything but the nom.-acc sing, found
in the older language, and other cases later are but very scantily represented.
398—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 150
b. Of as n. mouth, and úd water, only a case or two are found, in
the older language, beside āsán and āsyà, and udon and údaka (432).
399. Some of the alternative stems mentioned above are instances of
transition from the consonant to a vowel declension: thus, dánta, mā́sa.
A number of other similar cases occur, sporadically in the older language,
more commonly in the later. Such are pā́da, -māda, -dāśa, bhrājá,
viṣṭápa, dvāra and dura, pura, dhura, -dṛśa, nā́sā, nidā, kṣípā,
kṣapā́, āśā́, and perhaps a few others.
a. A few irregular stems will find a more proper place under the head
of Adjectives.
Adjectives.
400. Original adjectives having the root-form are comparatively
rare even in the oldest language.
a. About a dozen are quotable from the RV., for the most part only
in a few scattering cases. But moh great is common in RV., though
it dies out rapidly later. It makes a derivative feminine stem, mahī́,
which continues in use, as meaning earth etc.
401. But compound adjectives, having a root as final member,
with the value of a present participle, are abundant in every period
of the language.
a. Possessive adjective compounds, also, of the same form, are
not very rare: examples are yatásruc with offered bowl; sū́ryatvac
sun-skinned; cátuṣpad four-footed; suhā́rd kind-hearted, friendly;
rītyàp (i. e. rītí-ap) having streaming waters; sahásradvār furnished
with a thousand doors.
b. The inflection of such compounds is like that of the simple rootstems, masculine and feminine being throughout the same, and the neuter
varying only in the nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers. But special neuter
forms are of rare occurrence, and masc.-fem. are sometimes used instead.
C. Only rarely is a derivative feminine stem in ī formed: in the
older language, only from the compounds with ac or añc (407 ff.), those
with nan (402), those with pad, as ékapadī, dvipádī, and with dont,
as vṛ́ṣadatī, and mahī́, ámucī (AV.), úpasadī (?ŚB,).
Irregularities of inflection appear in the following:
402. The root hon slay, as final of a compound, is inflected
somewhat like a derivative noun in an (below, 420 ff.), becoming hā
in the nom. sing., and losing its n in the middle cases and its a in
the weakest cases (but only optionally in the loc. sing.). Further, when
the vowel is lost, h in contact with following n reverts to its original gh. Thus:
151 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTA L STEMS , [—404
N.
A.
I.
D.
Ab,
G.
L.
V.
Singular.
vṛtraháṇāu
vṛtrahábhyām
vṛtraghnós
vṛ́trahaṇāu
Dual. Plural.
vṛtrahá
vrtrahánam
vṛtraghnā́
vṛtraghné
vṛtraghnás
vṛtraghní, -háṇi
vṛ́trahan
vṛtraháṇas
vṛtraghnás
vṛtrahábhis
vṛtrahábhyas
vṛtraghnā́m
vṛtrahásu
vṛ́trahaṇas.
a. As to the change of n to ṇ, see 193, 195.
b. A feminine is made by adding ī to, as usual, the stem-form shown
in the weakest cases: thus, vṛtraghní.
c. An accus. pi. -hánas (like the nom.) also occurs. Vṛtrahábhis
(RV., once) is the only middle case-form quotable from the older language.
Transitions to the a-declension begin already in the Veda: thus, to -há
(RV. AV.), -ghná (RV.), -hana.
403. The root vah carry at the end of a compound is said by
the grammarians to be lengthened to vāh in both the strong and
middle cases, and contracted in the weakest cases to uh, which with
a preceding a-vowel becomes āu (137c): thus, from havyaváh sacrifice-bearing (epithet of Agni), havyavā́ṭ, havyavā́ham, havyāúhā,
etc.; havyavā́hāu, havyavā́ḍbhyām, havyāúhos; havyavā́has,
havyāúhas, havyavā́ḍbhis, etc. And śvetaváh (not quotable) is
said to be further irregular in making the nom. sing, in vās and the
vocative in vas or vās.
a. In the earlier language, only strong forms of compounds with vah
have been found to occur: namely, -vā́ṭ, -vā́ham, -vā́hāu or -vā́hā, and
-vā́has. But feminines in ī, from the weakest stem — as turyāuhī́,
dityāuhī́, paṣṭhāuhī — are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. TS. has the
irregular nom. sing, paṣṭhavā́t.
404. Of very irregular formation and inflection is one common
compound of vah, namely anaḍváh (anas + vah burden-bearing or
cart-drawing, I. e. ox). Its stem-form in the strong casesis anaḍvā́h,
in the weakest anaḍúh, and in the middle anaḍúd (perhaps by dissimilation from anaḍúḍ). Moreover, its nom. and voc. sing, are made
in van and van (as if from a vant-stem). Thus:
N.
A.
I.
D.
Ab,
G.
L.
Singular,
anaḍvā́n
anaḍvā́ham
anaḍúhā
anaḍúhe
anaḍúhas
anaḍúhi
ánaḍvan
Dual,
anaḍvā́hāu
anaḍúdbhyām
anaḍúhos
V. ánaḍvāhāu
Plural,
anaḍvā́has
anaḍúhas
anaḍúdbhis
anaḍúdbhyas
anaḍúhām
onaḍútsu
ánaḍvōhas
404—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 152
a. Anaḍúdbhyas (AV., once) is the only middle case-form quotable
from the older language. But compounds showing the middle stem — as
anaḍucchata, anaḍudarha — are met with in Brāhmaṇás etc.
b. The corresponding feminine stem (of very infrequent occurrence)
is either anaḍuhī́ (ŚB.) or anaḍvāhī́ (K. MS.).
405. The root sah overcome hasin the Veda a double irregularity:
its s is changeable to ṣ even after an a-vowel — as also in its single occurrence as an independent adjective (RV., tváṁ ṣā́ṭ) — while it sometimes remains unchanged after an i or u-vowel; and its a is either prolonged or remains unchanged, in both strong and weak cases. The quotable
forms are: -ṣā́ṭ, -ṣā́ham or -sā́ham or -sáham, -sáhā, -sā́he or -sáhe,
-ṣā́has or -ṣáhas or -sàhas; -sáhā (du.); -ṣā́has or -sáhas*
406. The compound avayā́j (√yaj make offering) a certain priest or
(BR.) a certain sacrifice is said to form the nom, and voc sing. avayā́S,
and to make its middle cases from avayás.
a. Its only quotable form is avayā́s, f. (RV. and AV., each once).
If the stem is a derivative from ava+√yaj conciliate, avayā́s is very
probably from ava+√yā, which has the same meaning. But sadhamā́s
(RV., once) and purodas (RV. twice) show a similar apparent substitution
in nom. sing, of the case-ending s after long ā for a final root-consonant
(d and ś respectively). Compare also the alleged śvetavās (above, 403).
407. Compounds with añc or ac. The root ac or añc
makes, in combination with prepositions and other words, a considerable class of familiarly used adjectives, of quite irregular formation
and inflection, in some of which it almost loses its character ofroot,
and becomes an ending of derivation.
a. A part of these adjectives have only two stem-forms: a strong
in añc (yielding an, from aṅks, in nom. sing, masc), and a weak in
ac; others distinguish from the middle in ac a weakest stem in c,
before which the a is contracted with a preceding i or u into ī or ū.
b. The feminine is made by adding ī to the stem-form used in
the weakest cases, and is accented like them.
408. As examples of inflection we may take prā́ñc forward,
east, pratyáñc opposite, west, víṣvañc going apart
Singular:
N. V. prā́ṅ prā́k pratyáṅ pratyák víṣvaṅ víṣvak
A. prā́ñcam prā́k pratyáñcam pratyák víṣvañcam víṣvak
I. prā́cā pratīcā́ víṣūcā
D. prā́ce pratīcé víṣūce
Ab. G. prā́cas pratīcás víṣūcas
L. prā́ci pratīcí víṣūci
Dual:
N. A. V. prā́ñcāu prā́cī pratyáñcāu pratīcī́ víṣvañcāu víṣūcī
I. D. Ab. prā́gbhyām pratyágbhyām víṣvagbhyām
G. L. prā́cos pratīcós víṣūcos
153 DECLENSIO N V . , CONSONANTA L STEMS . [—412
Plural:
N. V. prañcas prā́ñci pratyáñcas pratyáñci víṣvoñcas víṣvoñci
A. prā́cas" prā́ñci pratīcás pratyáñci víṣūcas víṣvañci
I. prā́gbhis pratyágbhis víṣvogbhis
D. Ab. prā́gbhyas pratyágbhyas víṣvogbhyas
G. prā́cām pratīcā́m víṣūcām
L. prā́kṣu pratyákṣu víṣvakṣu
a. The feminine stems are prā́cī, pratīcī́, víṣūcī, respectively.
b. No example of the middle forms excepting the nom. etc. sing,
neut. (and this generally used as adverb) is found either in RV. or AV.
In the same texts is lacking the nom. etc. pi. neut. in ñci; but of this a
number of examples occur in the Brāhmaṇas: thus, prā́ñci, pratyáñci,
arvāñci, samyáñci, sadhryañci, anvañci.
409. a. Like prā́ñc are inflected ápāñc, ávāño, párāñc,
arvā́ñc, adharā́ñc, and others of rare occurrence.
b. Like pratyáñc are inflected nyàñc (i. e. níañc), samyoñc
(sam+oñc, with irregularly inserted i), and údañc (weakest stem
údīc: ud + oñc, with i inserted in weakest cases only), with a few
other rare stems.
c. Like víṣvañc is inflected anváñc, also three or four others of
which only isolated forms occur.
d. Still more irregular is tiryáñc, of which the weakest stem
is tiráśc (tirás + ac: the other stems are made from tir+añc or ac,
with the inserted i).
410. The accentuation of these words is irregular, as regards both
the stemsthemselves and their inflected forms. Sometimes the one element
has the tone and sometimes the other, without any apparent reason for the
difference. If the compound is accented on the final syllable, the accent
is shifted in RV. to the ending in the weakest cases provided their stem
shows the contraction to ī or ū: thus, prā́cā, arvā́oā, adharā́cas, but
pratīcā́, anūcás, samīcī́. But AV. and later texts usually keep the
accent upon the stem: thus, pratī́cī, samī́cī, anū́cī (RV. has pratī́cīm
once). The shift of accent to the endings, and even in polysyllabic stems,
is against all usual analogy.
B. Derivative stems i n as, is, us.
411 . The stems of this division are prevailingly neuter;
but there are also a few masculines, and one or two
feminines.
412. The stems i n -3RT^ as are quite numerous, and
mostly made with the suffix ETCT^as (a small number also
412—] NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 154
withcTīī^tas and -TOjias, and some are obscure); the others
are few, and almost all made with the suffixes i^Ms and
3īī us.
413. Their inflection is almost entirely regular. But
masculine and feminine stems in EPFT^as lengthen the vowel
of the ending in nom. sing.; and the nom.-acc-voc. pi. neut.
make the same prolongation (of % a or ^ i or 3 u) before
the inserted nasal (anusvāra).
414. Examples of declension. As examples we
may take J-FTOMnánas n. mind; ^Í^ h áṅgiras m. Angiras;
«^Jc4^havís n. oblation.
Singular:
N.
mánas
A. J-Hīī
mánas
I. 3-RHT
mánasā
D. J-FRT
mánase
Ab. G. qFTīīH
mánasas
L. FRfīī
mánasi
V. im^
mánas
Dual:
N. A. v. rpreft
mánasī
I. D. Ab. h-iÌH4W
mánobhyām
G. L. qīīīīTīī^
mánasos
áṅgirās
áṅgirasam
áṅgirasā
áṅgirase
áṅgirasas
áṅgirasi
áṅgiras
áṅgirasāu
áṅgirobhyām
áṅgirasos
havís
havís
havíṣā
havíṣe
havíṣas
havíṣi
havís
havíṣī
havírbhyām
havíṣos
155 DECLENSIO N V., STEM S I N as, is, us. [—418
D . Ab. HÍIH-JH
mánobhyas
mánasām
L.
mánahsu
havī́ṃṣi
havírbhis
havírbhyas
^MIH ^
havíṣām
Plural:
N. A. V. ÍRTfà ^HU ^
mánāṃsi áṅgirasas
I. R%PT~ ^ -y^iPrīī^
mánobhis áṅgirobhis
áṅgirobhyas
áūgirasām
áṅgiraḥsu havíḥsu
In like manner, *—fŚïī cákṣus n. eye forms m^m cákṣuṣā, t|-r|^ÙH cákṣurbhyām, r\^\\i\ cákṣūṃṣi, and so on.
415. Vedic etc Irregularities, a. In the older language, the
endings -asam (acc. sing.) and -asas (generally nom.-acc pi.; once or
twice gen.-abl. sing.) of stems in as are not infrequently contracted to -ām,
-ās — e. g. āśā́m, vedhā́m; surā́dhās, ánāgās — and out of such
forms grow, both earlier and later, substitute-stems in ā, as āśā́, jarā́»
medhā́. So from other forms grow stems in a and in asa, which exchange
more or less with those in as through the whole history of the language.
b. More scattering irregularities may be mentioned, as follows : I. The
usual masc. and fem. du. ending in ā instead of āu; — 2. uṣás f. dawn
often prolongs its a in the other strong cases, as in the nom. sing.: thus,
uṣā́sam, uṣā́sā, uṣā́sas (and once in a weak case, uṣā́sas); and in its
instr. pi. occurs once (RV.) uṣádbhis instead of uṣóbhis; — 3. from
tośás is once (RV.) found a similar dual, tośā́sā; — 4. from svávas
and svátavas occur in RV. a nom. sing. masc. in van, as if from a stem
in vant; and in the Brāhmaṇas is found the dat.-abl. pi. of like formation
svátavadbhyas.
c. The stems in is and us also show transitions to stems in i and
u, and in iṣa and uṣa. From janús is once (RV.) made the nom. sing,
janū́s, after the manner of an as-stem (cf. also janūrvā́sas ŚB.).
• 416. The grammarians regard uśánas m. asregular stem-form of the
proper name noticed above (355 a), but give it the irregular nom. uśánā
and the voc. uśanas or uśana or uśanan. Forms from the as-stem,
even nom., are sometimes met with in the later literature.
a. As to forms from as-stems to áhan or áhar and ū́dhan or ū́dhar,
see below, 430.
417—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 156
Adjectives.
417. a. A few neuter nouns in as with accent on the radical
syllable have corresponding adjectives or appellatives in ás, with
accent on the ending: thus, for example, ápas work, apás active;
táras quickness, tarás quick; yáśas glory, yaśás glorious. A few
other similar adjectives — as tavás mighty, vedhás pious — are
without corresponding nouns.
b. Original adjectives in is do not occur (as to alleged desider¬
ative adjectives in is, see 392 d). But in us are found as many adjectives as nouns (about ten of each class); and in severalinstances
adjective and noun stand side by side, without difference of accent
such as appears in the stems in as: e. g. tápus heat and hot; vápus
wonder and wonderful.
418. Adjective compounds having nouns of this division as final
member are very common: thus, sumánas favorably minded; dīrgh¬
ā́yus long-lived; śukráśocis having brilliant brightness. The stemform is the same for all genders, and each gender is inflected in the
usual manner, the stems in as making their nom. sing. masc. and
fem. in ās (like áṅgiras, above). Thus, from sumánas, the nom.
and accus. are as follows:
Singular. Dual. Plural,
i . Ī. n . m. f. n . m. f. n.
N. sumánās –nas
A. sumánasam -nas
sumánasāu -nasī sumánasas -nāṃsi
and the other cases (save the vocative) are alike m all genders.
a. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, the neut. nom. sing, is in a considerable
number of instances made in ās, like the other genders.
b. From dīrghā́yus, in like manner:
N. dīrghayus
A. dīrghā́yuṣam -yus
I. dīrghā́yuṣā
etc
dīrghā́yuṣāu -yuṣī dīrghā́yuṣas -yūṃṣi
dīrghā́yurbhyām dīrghā́yurbhis
etc. etc.
419. The stem onehás unrivalled (defined as meaning time in the
later language) forms the nom. sing. masc. and fem. onehā́.
C. Derivative stems i n an.
420. The stems of this division are those made by the
three suffixes \ an, q~ man, and W\ van, together with a
few of more questionable etymology which are inflected
like them. They are almost exclusively masculine and
neuter.
421. The stem has a triple form. In the strong cases
157 DECLENSIO N V . , STEM S I N an. [—424
of the masculine, the vowel of the ending is prolonged to
EfT ā; in the weakest eases it is in general struck out altogether; in the middle cases, or before a ease-ending beginning with a consonant, the final s‡ n is dropped. The
^ n is also lost in the nom. sing, of both genders (leaving
m ā as final in the masculine, 3f a in the neuter).
a. The peculiar cases of the neuter follow the usual
analogy (311b): the nom.-acc.-voc. pi. have the lengthening
to m a, as strong cases; the nom.-acc.-voc. du., as weakest
cases, have the loss of a — but this only optionally, not
necessarily.
b. In the loc. sing., also, the a may be either rejected or retained (compare the corresponding usage with ṛ-stems: 373). And
after the m or v of man or van, when these are preceded by another consonant, the a is always retained, to avoid a too great accumulation of consonants.
422. The vocative sing, is in masculines the pure stem;
in neuters, either this or like the nominative. The rest of
the inflection requires no description.
423. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked that when, in
the weakest cases, an acute á of the suffix is lost, the tone is thrown
forward upon the ending.
424. Examples of declension. As such may be
taken "^T5F^rā́jan m. king; M\rH*i ātmán m. soul, self;
-TFFï nāman n. name. Thus:
Singular:
rā́jā
A. ‡T-TH^
rā́jānam
-• jm
rā́jñā
rajñe
— T T
ātmā́
— — r
ātmanam
ātmán ā
mm
ātmán e
nā́ma
=TFT
-Z.
nama
-nrrr
nā́mnā
nā́mne
424—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 158
Ab. G.
L.
V.
N. A. V.
I. D. Ab.
O. L.
N.
A.
Ī.
D. Ab.
O.
L.
rájña s
rā́jñi, rā́jani
raj an
Dual:
rā́jānāu
rā́jabhyām
rā́jños
Plural :
rā́jānas
rā́jñas
rā́jabhis
^UIUW^
rā́jabhyas
rā́jñām
TO
ráias u
ātmána s
-—īīc-TR
ātmán i
ā́tman
~FTH T
ātmā́nāu
-MlcHUIH^
ātmábhyām
ātmáno s
ātmāna s
-7TFRīī
ātmána s
^lcHfaīī^
ātmábhis
ātmábhya s
*llcHHIH
ātmánām
o
ātmás u
~f~-f
nā́mnas
nā́mni, nā́mani
‚ Wī
J. JL
naman, nama
–rraì"* TFF Í
nā́mnī, nā́manī
HIH^UIH
nā́mabhyām
HIHÌU
nā́mnos
TfīīTH
namān i
nā́māni
nā́mabhis
-|MH|^
nā́mabhyas
nā́mnām
o
nā́masu
a. The weakest cases of mūrdhá n m. head, would be accented
mūrdhnā́, mūrdhné , mūrdhnós, mūrdhná s (acc. pl), mūrdhnā́m,
etc.; and so in all similar cases (loc. sing., mūrdhn í or mūrdháni).
425. Vedic Irregularities, a. Here, as elsewhere, the ending of
the nom.-acc.-voc. du. masc. is usually ā instead of āu.
b. The briefer form (with ejected a) of the loc. sing., and of the
neut. nom.-acc.-voc. du., is quite unusual in the older language. RV.
writes once śatadā́vni, but it is to be read śatadavani ; and similar
cases occur in AV. (but also several times -mni). In the Brāhmaṇas, too,
such forms as dhāman i and sāmanī are very much more common than
such as ohni and lomnL
159 DECLENSIO N V . , STEM S I N an. [—428
c. But throughout both Veda and Brāhmaṇa, an abbreviated form of
the loc. sing., with the ending i omitted, or identical with the stem, is of
considerably more frequent occurrence than the regular form: thus, mūr¬
dhán, kármon, ádhvan, beside mūrdháni etc. The n has all the
usual combinations of a final n: e. g. mūrdhann asya, mūrdhant sa,
mūrdhaṃs tvā.
d. In the nom.-acc. pi. neut., also, an abbreviated form is common,
ending in ā or (twice as often) a, instead of āni: thus, bráhma and
bráhmā, beside bráhmāṇi: compare the similar series of endings from
a-stems, 329 c.
e. From a few stems in man is made an abbreviated inst. sing.,
with loss of m as well as of a: thus, mahinā́, prathinā́, variṇā́, dānā́,
preṇā́, bhūnā́, for mahimnā́ etc. And drāghmā́ and raśmā́ (RV.,
each once) are perhaps for drāghmáṇā, raśmánā.
f. Other of the weakest cases than the loc. sing, are sometimes found
with the a of the suffix retained: thus, for example, bhū́manā, dā́mane,
yā́manas, ukṣáṇas (accus. pi.), etc. In the infinitive datives (970 d)
— trā́maṇe, vidmáne, dāváne, etc. — the a always remains. About
as numerous are the instancesin which the a, omitted in the written form
of the text, is, as the metre shows, to be restored in reading.
g. The voc. sing, in vas, which is the usual Vedic form from stems
in vant (below, 454 b), is found also from a few in van, perhaps by a
transfer to the vont-declension: thus, ṛtāvas, evayāvas, khidvas(?),
prātaritvas, mātariśvas, vibhāvas.
h. For words of which the a is not made long in the strong cases,
see the next paragraph.
426. A few stems do not make the regular lengthening of a in
the strong cases (except the nom. sing.). Thus:
a. The names of divinities, pūṣán, aryamán: thus, pūṣā́, pūṣá¬
ṇam, pūsṇa, etc.
b. In the Veda, ukṣán lull (but also ukṣā́ṇam); yóṣan maiden;
vṛ́ṣan virile, bull (but vṛ́ṣāṇam and vṛ́ṣāṇas are also met with); tmán,
abbreviation of ātmán; and two or three other scattering forms: anarvá¬
ṇam, jémanā. And in a number of additional instances, the Vedic metre
seems to demand a where ā is written.
427. The stems śván m. dog and yuvan young have in the
weakest cases the contracted form śún and yū́n (with retention of
the accent); in the strong and middle cases they are regular. Thus,
śvā́, śvā́nam, śúnā, śúne, etc., śvábhyām, śvábhis, etc.; yúvā,
yúvānam, yū́nā, yúvabhis, etc.
a. In dual, RV. has once yū́nā for yúvānā.
428. The stem maghávan generous (later, almost exclusively
a name of Indra) is contracted in the weakest cases to maghón:
thus, maghávā, maghávānam, maghónā, maghóne, etc.
428 — V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 1 6 0
a. The RV. has once the weak form maghónas in nom. pi.
b. Parallel with this is found the stem maghávont (division E);
and from the latter alone in the older language are made the middle cases:
thus, maghavadbhis, maghavatsu, etc. (not maghavabhis etc.).
4 2 9 a. Stems in a, ma, va, parallel with those in an, man, van,
and doubtless in many cases derived from them through transitional forms,
are frequent in both the earlier and the later language, particularly as final
members of compounds.
b. A number of an-stems are more or less defective, making a
part of their forms from other stems. Thus:
480 . a. The stem áhan n. day is in the later language used
only in the strong and weakest cases, the middle (with the nom.
sing., which usually followstheir analogy) coming from áhar or áhas:
namely, áhar nom.-acc. sing., áhobhyām, áhobhis, etc. (PB. has
aharbhis); but áhnā etc., áhni or áhani (or áhan), áhnī or áhanī,
áhāni (and, in V . , áhā).
b. In the oldest language, the middle cases áhabhis, áhabhyas,
áhasu also occur.
c. In composition, only ahar or ahas is used as preceding member;
as final member, ahar, ahas, ahan, or the derivatives aha, ahna.
d. The stem ū́dhan n. udder exchanges in like manner, in the old
language, with ū́dhar and ū́dhas, but has become later an as-stem only
(except in thefem.ūdhnī of adjective compounds): thus, ū́dhar or ū́dhas,
ū́dhnas, ū́dhan or ū́dhani, ū́dhabhis, ū́dhaḥsu. As derivatives from
it are made both ūdhanyà and ūdhasya.
431 . The neuter stems akṣán eye, asthán bone, dadhán curds,
sakthán thigh, form in the later language only the weakest eases,
akṣṇā́, asthné, dadhnás, sakthní or saktháni, and so on; the rest
of the inflection is made from stems in i, ákṣi etc.: see above,
3 4 3 I.
a. In the older language, other cases from the an-stems occur: thus,
akṣā́ṇi, akṣábhis, and akṣasu; asthā́ni, asthábhis, and asthábhyas;
sakthā́m.
432 . The neuter stems asán blood, yakán liver, śakán ordure,
āsán mouthy udán water, doṣán fore-arm, yūṣán broth, are required
to make their nom.-acc.-voc. in all numbers from the parallel stems
ásṛj, yákṛt, śákṛt, āsyà, údaka (in older language udoká), dos,
yūṣá, which are fully inflected.
a. Earlier occurs also the dual doṣám.
433 . The stem pánthan m. road is reckoned in the later language as making the complete set ofstrong cases, with the irregularity
that the nom.-voc. sing, adds a s. The corresponding middle cases
are made from pathi, and the weakest from path. Thus:
161 DECLENSIO N V . , DERIVATIV E STEM S I N an. [—438
from pánthan — pánthās, pánthānam; pánthānāu; pán¬
thānas;
from pathí — pathíbhyām; pathíbhis, pathíbhyas, pathíṣu;
from path — pathā́, pathé, pathás, pathí; pathós; pathás
or páthas (accus.), pathā́m.
a. In the oldest language (RV.), however, the strong stem is only
pánthā: thus, pánthās, nom. sing.; pánthām, acc. sing.; pánthās,
nom. pi.; and even in AV., pánthānam and pánthānas are rare compared with the others. From pathi occur also the nom. pi, patháyas
and gen. pi. pathīnā́m. RV. has once pāthás, acc. pi., with long ā.
434. The stems mánthan m. stirring-stick, and ṛbhukṣán m., an
epithet of Indra, are given by the grammarians the same inflection with
pánthan; but only a few cases have been found in use. In V. occur from
the former the acc. sing, mánthām, and gen. pi. mathīnā́m (like the
corresponding cases from pánthan); from the latter, the nom. sing, ṛbhu¬
kṣā́s and voc. pi. ṛbhukṣās, like the corresponding Vedic forms of pan than;
but also the acc. sing, ṛbhukṣáṇam and nom. pi. ṛbhukṣáṇas, which
are after quite another model.
Adjectives.
435. Original adjective stems in an are almost exclusively those
made with the suffix van, as yájvan sacrificing, sútvan pressing the
soma, jitvan conquering. The stem is masc and neut. only (but
sporadic cases of its use as fem. occur in RV.) ; the corresponding
fem. stem is made in varī: thus, yájvarī, jítvarī.
436. Adjective compounds having a noun in an asfinal member are inflected after the model of noun-stems; and the masculine
forms are sometimes used also as feminine; but usually a special
feminine is made by adding ī to the weakest form of the masculine
stem: thus, sómarājñī, kīlā́lodhnī, ékamūrdhnī, durṇā́mnī.
437. But (as was pointed out above: 429 a) nouns in an occurring
as final members of compounds often substitute a stem in a for that in
an: thus, -rāja, -janma, -adhva, -aha; their feminine is in ā. Occasional exchanges of stems in van and in vant also occur: thus, vivásvan
and vivásvant.
a. The remaining divisions of the consonantal declension are
made up of adjective stems only.
D. Derivative stems (adjective) in in.
438. The stems of this division are those formed with
the suffixes 3=7 in, fÌFT min, and fipT vin. They are mas-
438—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 162
culine and neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made
by adding ^ ī.
a. The stems in in are very numerous, since almost any noun
in a in the language may form a possessive derivative adjective with
this suffix: thus, bála strength, balín m. n. balínī f. possessing strength,strong. Stems in vin (1232), however, are very few, and those in
min (1231) still fewer.
439. Their inflection is quite regular, except that they
lose their final in the middle eases (before an initial
consonant of the ending), and also in the nom. sing., where
the masculine lengthens the ^ i by way of compensation.
The voc. sing, is in the masculine the bare stem; in the
neuter, either this or like the nominative.
a. In all these respects, it will be noticed, the in-declension
agrees with the an-declension; but it differs from the latter in never
losing the vowel of the ending.
440. Exampl e of inflection . As such may be
taken <slíy-| balin strong. Thus:
Singular,
m. n.
Dual.
m. n.
balínāu balínī
balíbhyām
balínos
srfênt ^rf^Ffr
bálināu bálinī
Plural,
m. n.
balínas balī́ni
balíbhis
balíbhyas
balínām
balíṣu
bálinas bálīni
N. —srfê r
balī́ balí
A. ^íd-|H srfêr
balínam balí
I. «MÍdHI
balínā
D.
balíne
I balínas
I.. srísrft
balíni
bálin bálin, báli
1 6 3 DECLENSIO N V . , DERIVATIV E STEM S IN in. [—444
a. The derived feminine stem in inī is inflected, of course, like
any other feminine in derivative ī (364).
441. a. There are no irregularities in the inflection of in-stems‚
in either the earlier language or the later — except the usual Vedic
dual ending in ā instead of āu.
b. Stems in in exchange with stems in i throughout the whole history of the language, those of the one class being developed out of those
of the other often through transitional forms. In a much smaller number
of cases, stems in in are expanded to stems in ina: e. g. śākinà (RV.),
śuṣmiṇa (B.), barhiṇa, bhajina.
E. Derivative stems (adjective) in ant (or at).
442. These stems fall into two sub divisions: 1. those
made by the suffix -~T ant (or Wi at), being, with a very
few exceptions, active participles, present and future;
2. those made by the possessive suffixes *RT^ mant and
ofvant (or īīcT mat and öTcT vat). They are masculine and
neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made by ad¬
dmg ^ ī.
1. Participles in ant or at.
443. The stem has in general a double form, a stronger
and a weaker, ending respectively in ETrT^ant and 3RT^at.
The former is taken in the strong cases of the masculine,
with, as usual, the nom.-acc.-voc. pi. neuter; the latter is
taken by all the remaining cases.
a. But, in accordance with the rule for the formation of the feminine
stem (below, 449), the future participles, and the present participles of
verbs of the tud-class or accented á-class (752), and of verbs of the adclass or root-class ending in ā, are by the grammarians allowed to make
the nom.-acc.-voc. du. neut. from either the stronger or the weaker stem;
and the present participles from all other present-stems ending in a are
required to make the same from the strong stem.
444. Those verbs, however, which in the 3d pi. pres.
active lose ^ n of the usual ending % nti (550 b), lose it
also in the present participle, and have no distinction of
strong and weak stem.
444—] Y . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 164
a. Such are the verbs forming their present-stem by reduplication
without added a: namely, those of the reduplicating or hu-class (655) and
the intensives (1012): thus, from √hu, present-stem juhu, participlestem júhvat; intensive-stem johu, intensive participle-stem jóhvat.
Further, the participles of roots apparently containing a contracted reduplication: namely, cákṣat, dā́śat, dā́sat, śā́sat, sáścat; the aorist participle dhákṣat, and vāghát(?), Vavṛdhánt (RV., once), which has the n
notwithstanding its reduplication, comes, like the desiderative participles
(1032), from a stem in a: compare vāvṛdhánta, vāvṛdhásva.
b. Even these verbs are allowed by the grammarians to make the
nom.-acc.-voc. pi. neut. in onti.
445. The inflection of these stems is quite regular.
The nom. sing. masc. comes to end in ER^an by the regular (150) loss of the two final consonants from the etymological form 5l^ants. The vocative of each gender is like
the nominative.
446. Stems accented on the final syllable throw the accent
forward upon the case-ending in the weakest cases (not in the middle
also).
a. In the dual neut. (as in the feminine stem) from such participles,
the accent is ántī if the n is retained, atī́ if it is lost.
447. Examples of declension. As such may serve
vfcfr^bhávant being, 5^r^adánt eating, rT^ júhvat sacrificing. Thus:
Singular:
N‚ HcR H~Ti
bhávan bhávat
A. H"Hīī^ -"frT^
bhávantam bhávat
I. ffiì
bhávatā
D. mìì
bhávate
Ab. G. H^frTīī^
bhávatas
L. ^RÍrT
bhávati
— ‚ — ‚
adán adát
— \
adántam adát
^TïT
adatā́
adaté
adatás
adatí
júhvat júhvat
júhvatam júhvat
o
júhvatā
^ r T
o
júhvate
p m .
júhvatas
o
júhvati
1 6 5 DECLENSIO N V . , DERIVATIV E STEM S I N ant. [—448
v. w i
bhávan bhávat
Dual:
bhávantāu bhávantī
I.D. Ab. H<-RI1H
bhávadbhyām
G. L. màm^
bhávatos
Plural:
N. v. H3rTīī^ Hörf^f
bhávantas bhávanti
A. H~~T H3Í%
bhávatas bhávanti
I. mrkn^
bhávadbhis
D. Ab. H^^4H
bhávadbhyas
bhávatām
L. H"fīīo
bhávatsu
ádan ádat
adatī́
adántāu
adádbhyām
adatós
adántas adánti
adatás adánti
adádbhis
adádbhyas
~ p ^
adatam
~ ā
adátsu
júhvat
júhvatāu júhvatī
O "v.
júhvadbhyām
júhvatos
a. The future participle bhaviṣyánt may form in nom. etc. dual
neuter either bhaviṣyántī or bhaviṣyatī́; tudánt, either tudántī or
tudatī́; yā́nt (√yā), either yā́ntī or yātī́. And júhvat, in nom. etc.
plural neuter, may make also júhvanti (beside júhvati, as given in
the paradigm above).
b. But these strong forms (as well as bhávantī, du., and its like
from present-stems in unaccented a) are quite contrary to general analogy,
and of somewhat doubtful character. No example of them is quotable,
either from the older or from the later language. The cases concerned,
indeed, would be everywhere qf rare occurrence.
448. The Vedic deviations from the model as above given are few.
The dual ending āu is only one sixth as common as ā. Anomalous accent
is seen in a case or two: acodáte, rathirāyátām, and vāghádbhis (if
this is a participle). The only instance in V. of nom. etc. pi. neut. is
sā́nti, with lengthened ā (compare the forms in ānti, below, 451 a, 454 c);
one or two examples in anti are quotable from B.
júhvatas júhvati
júhvatas júhvati
júhvadbhis
júhvadbhyas
júhvatām
júhvatsu
449—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 166
449. The feminine participle-stem, as already stated,
is made by adding | ī to either the strong or the weak
stem-form of the masc.-neut. The rules as to which of the
two forms shall be taken are the same with those given
above respecting the nom. etc. dual neuter; namely:
a. Participles from tense-stems ending in unaccented a add ī
to the strong stem-form, or make their feminine in antī.
b. Such are the bhū or unaccented a-class and the dīv or ya-class of
present-stems (chap. IX.), and the desideratives and causatives (chap. XIV.):
thus, from √bhū (stem bháva), bhávantī; from √dīv (stem dīvya),
dī́vyantī; from búbhūṣa and bhāváya (desid. and caus. of √bhū),
búbhūṣantī and bhāváyantī.
C Exceptions to this rule are now and then met with, even from the
earliest period. Thus, RV. has járatī, and AV. the desiderative síṣāsatī;
in B. occur vadatī, śocatī, tṛpyatī, and in S. further tiṣṭhatī, and the
causative namayatī; while in the epics and later such cases (including
desideratives and causatives) are more numerous (about fifty are quotable),
though still only sporadic.
d. Participles from tense-stems in accented á may add the feminine-sign either to the strong or to the weak stem-form, or may make
their feminines in ántī or in atī́ (with accent as here noted).
e. Such are the present-stems ofthe tud or accented á-class (751 ff.),
the s-futures (932 ff.), and the denominatives (1053 ff.): thus, from √tud
(stem tudá), tudántī or tudatī́; from bhaviṣyá (fut. of √bhū), bha¬
viṣyántī or bhaviṣyatī́; from devayá (denom. of devá), devayantī
or devayatī́.
f. The forms in ántī from this class are the prevailing ones. No
future fem. participle in atī́ is quotable from the older language. From
pres.-stems in á are found there ṛñjatí and siñcatī́ (RV.), tudatī and
pinvatī (AV.). From denominatives, devayatī́ (RV.), durasyatí and
śatrūyatī́ (AV.). In BhP. occurs dhakṣyatL
g. Verbs of the ad or root-class (611 ff.) ending in ā are given
by the grammarians the same option as regards the feminine of the present
participle: thus, from √yā, yā́ntī or yātī́. The older language affords no
example of the former, so far as noted.
h. From other tense-stems than those already specified — that
is to say, from the remaining classes of present-stems and from the
intensives — the feminine is formed in atī́ (or, if the stem be otherwise accented than on the final, in atī) only.
i. Thus, adatī́ from √ad; júhvatī from √hu; yuñjatī́ from √yuj;
sunvatī́ from √su; kurvatī́ from √kṛ; krīṇatī́ from √krī; dédiśatī
from dédiś (intens. of √diś).
167 DECLENSIO N V . , DERIVATIV E STEM S I N ant. [—452
j . Feminine stems of this class are occasionally (but the case is much
less frequent than its opposite: above, c) found with the nasal: thus,
yántī (AV‚, once), undántī (ŚB.; but probably from the secondary á-stem),
gṛhṇantī (S,), and, in the epics and later, such forms as bruvantī,
rudantī, cinvantī, kurvantī, jānantī, muṣṇantL
450. A few words are participial in form and inflection, though
not in meaning. Thus:
a. bṛhánt (often written vṛhánt) great; it is inflected like a
participle (with bṛhatī́ and bṛhánti in du. and pi. neut.).
b. mahánt great; inflected like a participle, but with the irregularity that the a of the ending is lengthened in the strong forms:
thus, mahā́n, mahā́ntam; mahā́ntāu (neut. mahatī́); mahantas,
mahā́nti: instr. mahatā́ etc.
c. pṛ́ṣant speckled, and (in Veda only) rúśant shining.
d. jagat movable, lively (in the later language, as neuter noun, world),
a reduplicated formation from √gam go its nom. etc neut. pi. is allowed
by the grammarians to be only jáganti.
e. ṛhánt small (only once, in RV., ṛhaté).
f. All these form their feminine in atī only: thus, bṛhatī́,
mahatī́, pṛ́ṣatī and rúśatī (contrary to the rule for participles),
jágatī.
g. For dánt tooth, which is perhaps of participial origin, see above,
396.
451. The pronominal adjectives íyant and kiyant are inflected
like adjectives in mant and vant, having (452) íyān and kíyān as
nom. masc. sing., íyatī and kíyatī as nom. etc. du. neut. and as
feminine stems, and iyanti and kiyanti as nom. etc. plur. neut.
a. But the neut. pi. íyānti and the loc. sing. (?) kíyāti are found
in RV.
2. Possessives in mant and vant.
452. The adjectives formed by these two suffixes are
inflected precisely alike, and very nearly like the participles
in SRT^ant. From the latter they differ only by lengthening
the % a in the nom. sing. masc.
a. The voc sing, is in an, like that of the participle (in the
later language, namely: for that of the oldest, see below, 454b).
The neut. nom. etc. are in the dual only atī (or átī), and in the plural anti (or ánti).
b. The feminine is always made from the weak stem: thus,
matī, vatī (or mátī, vátī). One or two cases of nī instead of ī
are met with: thus, antárvatnī (B. and later), pativatnī (C).
452—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 168
c. The accent, however, is never thrown forward (as in the
participle) upon the case-ending or the feminine ending.
453. To illustrate the inflection of such stems, it will
be sufficient to give a ‚part of the forms of M^Hrl^paśumánt
possessing cattle, and H^Nr^ bhágavant fortunate, blessed.
Thus:
N.
A.
I.
V.
N. A. V.
N. V.
A.
I.
Singular:
m. n. m. n.
^wm wm W-T H w-~r
o "s o -\ *\ -s
paśumā́n paśumàt bhágavān bhágavat
^mwī^ w
paśumántam paśumát bhágavantam bhágavat
'WTcTT H-Mcil
o
paśumátā bhágavatā
etc. etc.
™ \ Wīr ^ WTFf ^
pàśuman páśu:mat bhágavan bhágavat
Dual:
"5THtí W f t Wm† Wirf t
•0 o
paśumántāu paśumátī bhágavantāu bhágavatī
etc. etc.
Plural:
O 'S.
paśumántas
Wlrlī ī
paśumátas
o
paśumánti
o
paśumánti
HiNrIH
bhágavantas
bhágavatas
bhágavanti
HJMÍrl
bhágavanti
o \
paśumádbhis
etc.
bhágavadbhis
etc.
454. Vedic Irregularities, a. In dual masc. nom. etc., a (for
āu) is the greatly prevailing ending.
b. In voc.sing, masc, the ending in the oldest language (RV.) is
almost always in as instead of an (as in the perfect participle: below,
462 a): thus, adrivas, harivas, bhānumas, haviṣmas. Such vocatives
in RV. occur more than a hundred times, while not a single unquestionable
instance of one in an is to be found. In the other Vedic texts, vocatives
in as are extremely rare (but bhagavas and its contraction bhagos are
met with, even in the later language); and in their reproduction of RV
1 6 9 DECLENSIO N V . , DFRIVATIV E STEM S I N ant. [—458
passages the as is usually changed to an. It was pointed out above (425g)
that the RV. makes the voc. in as also apparently from a few an-stems.
e. In RV., the nom. etc pi. neut., in the only two instances that
occur, ends in ānti instead of anti: thus, ghṛtávānti, paśumā́nti.
No such forms have been noted elsewhere in the older language: the SV.
reads anti in its version of the corresponding passages, and a few examples of the same ending are quotable from the Brāhmaṇas: thus, tāvanti ,
etavanti, yā́vanti, ghṛtávanti, pravanti, ṛtumanti, yugmanti. Compare 448, 451.
d. In a few (eight or ten) more or less doubtful cases, a confusion
of strong and weak forms of stem is made; they are too purely sporadic to
require reporting. The same is true of a case or two where a masculine
form appears to be used with a feminine noun.
45Ś. The stem árvan t running, steed, has the nom. sing, árvā ,
from árvan ; and in the older language also the voc. arvan and accus.
árvāṇam.
456. Besides the participle bhávant, there is another stem bhá¬
vant, frequently used in respectful address as substitute for the
pronoun of the second person (but construed, of course, with a verb
in the third person), which is formed with the suffix vant, and so
declined, having in the nom. sing, bhávān ; and the contracted form
bhos of its old-style vocative bhavas is a common exclamation of
address: you, sir! Its origin has been variously explained; but it is
doubtless a contraction of bhágavant.
457. The pronominal adjectives tā́vant, etā́vant, yā́vant, and the
Vedic ī́vant, mā́vant, tvā́vant, etc, are inflected like ordinary derivatives
from nouns.
P . Perfec t Participle s i n vans.
458. The active participles of the perfect tense-system
are quite peculiar as regards the modifications of their stem.
In the strong cases, including the nom.-acc-voc pi. neut,
the form of their suffix is 5ffcï vans, which becomes, by regu¬
lar process (150), van in the nom. sing., and which i s
shortened to cp^van in the voc. sing. In the weakest
cases, the suffix is contracted into 3^Miṣ. In the middle
cases, including the nom.-acc-voc neut. sing., it is changed
to ~cT vat.
-x
a. A union-vowel i , if present in the strong and middle cases,
disappears in the weakest, before u ṣ.
459--] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 170
459. The forms as thus described are masculine and
neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made by adding
^ ī to the weakest form of stem, ending thus in 3"-ft úṣī,
460. The accent is always upon the suffix, whatever be its form.
461. Example s of inflection . To show the inflection of these participles, we may take the stems f%KÍīī
vidvāṃs knowing (which has irregular loss of the usual reduplication and of the perfect meaning) from √í%~ vid‚
and H T^tasthivā́ṃs having stood from √F5TF sthā.
Singular:
m. n. m. n.
*N 'S *N N
vidvā́n vidvát tasthivā́n tasthivát
A . femq fà—r HPwmq mmn
vidvā́ṃsam vidvát tasthivā́ṃsam tasthivát
I. rlTSf-T
vidúṣā tasthúṣā
vidúṣe tasthúṣe
Ab. G. fàiMW rīTWr
vidúṣas tasthúṣas
L. wpm
vidúṣi tasthúṣi
V. fà~T fecT rriī W
*\ -V "S. -X
vídvan vídvat tásthivan tásthivat
Dual:
N.A.V. fà^íīī† Rjsft HÍkcJiJì īīW–ft
vidvā́ṃsāu vidúṣī tasthivā́ṃsāu tasthúṣī
I. D. Ab. fe^TTīī^ nrw^ii ^
vidvádbhyām tasthivádbhyām
G. L. Í^ÌNÌM H^ÍÌH
vidúṣos tasthúṣos
171 DECLENSIO N V . , PARTICIPLE S I N vāṃs. [—462
Plural:
vidvansas vidvansi tasthivā́ṃsas tasthivā́ṃsi
A . fcgm fezfm rmm HR-^ÌÍÙ
vidúṣas vidvā́ṃsi tasthúṣas tasthivā́ṃsi
I. fefeī dīWp W
vidvádbhis tasthivádbhis
D. Ab. í^d W rrfF^Tīī
vidvádbhyas tasthivádbhyas
G. Um\^ ?&mi\
vidúṣām tasthúṣām
L. feīī cTTTWī ī
o o
vidvátsu tasthivátsu
a. The feminine stems of these two participles are fô^ -íì
vidúṣī and rïT-T^ tasthúṣī.
o
b. Other examples of the different stems are:
from √kṛ — cakṛvā́ṃs, cakṛvát, cakrúṣ, cakrúṣī;
from √nī — ninīvā́ṃs, ninīvát, ninyúṣ, ninyúṣī;
from √bhū — babhūvā́ṃs, babhūvát, babhūvúṣ, babhūvúṣī;
from √tan — tenivā́ṃs, tenivát, tenúṣ, tenúṣī.
462. a. In the oldest language (RV.), the vocative sing. masc. (like
that of vant and mant-stems: above, 454b) has the ending vas instead
of van: thus, cikitvas (changed to -van in a parallel passage of AV.),
titirvas, dīdivas, mīḍhvas.
b. Forms from the middle stem, in vat, are extremely rare earlier:
only three (tatanvát and vavṛtvát, neut. sing., and jāgṛvádbhis, instr.
pi.), are found in RV., and not one in AV. And in the Veda the weakest
stem (not, as later, the middle one) is made the basis of comparison and
derivation: thus, vidúṣṭara, ádāśuṣṭara, mīḍhúṣṭama, mīḍhúṣmant.
c. An example or two of the use of the weak stem-form for cases
regularly made from the strong are found in RV.: they are cakrúṣam,
acc. sing., and ábibhyuṣas, nom. pi.; emuṣám, by its accent (unless an
error), is rather from a derivative stem emuṣá; and ŚB. has proṣúṣam.
Similar instances, especially from vidvā́ṃs, are now and then met with
later (see BR., under vidvā́ṃs).
d. The AV. has once bhoktivā́ṃsas, as if a participial form from a
noun; but K. and TB. give in the corresponding passage bhaktivā́nas;
cokhvā́ṃsam (RV., once) is of doubtful character; okivā́ṃsā (RV., once)
shows a reversion to guttural form of the final of √uc, elsewhere unknown.
463—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 172
G. Comparatives in yāṃs or yas.
463. The comparative adjectives of primary formation
(below, 467) have a double form of stem for masculine and
neuter: a stronger, ending in H7īī^yāṃs (usually ^ÍHJyāṃs),
in the strong cases, and a weaker, in EFT yas (or ^Tīī īyas),
in the weak cases (there being no distinction of middle and
weakest). The voc. sing. masc. ends in ER yan (but for
the older language see below, 465 a).
a. The feminine is made by adding ^ ī to the weak
masc.-neut. stem.
464. As models of inflection, it will be sufficient to
give a part of the forms of ÌHTīī śróyas better, and of
JT^ftlīī^ gárīyas heavier. Thus:
Singular:
N.
A .
1.
V.
N. A. V.
N. V.
A.
śréyān
śréyāṃsam
śréyas
śréyas
gárīyān
gárīyāṃsam
gárīyas
gárīyas
śréyasā
etc.
gárīyasā
etc.
W7J\
śréyan
Dual:
śréyāṃsāu
etc.
Plural:
śréyāṃsas
śréyasas
śréyas
śréyasī
etc.
śréyāṃsi
śréyāṃsi
gárīyan
īīfhTÍīīt
gárīyāṃsāu
etc.
gárīyāṃsas
gárīyasas
gárīyas
gárīyasī
etc.
-Tfterífīī
gárīyāṃsi
gárīyāṃsi
śréyobhis gárīyobhis
etc. etc.
173 COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES . [—467
a. The feminine stems of these adjectives are WTffi
śréyasī and 3Tf%T^ gárīyasī.
465. a. The Vedic voc. masc. (as in the two preceding divisions:
454b, 462a) is in yas instead of yon: thus, ojīyas, jyāyas (RV.: no
examples elsewhere have been noted).
b. No example of a middle case occurs in RV. or AV.
c. In the later language are found a very few apparent examples of
strong cases made from the weaker stem-form: thus, kanīyasam and
yavīyasam acc. masc, kanīyasāu du., yavīyasas nom. pi.
Comparison.
466. Derivative adjective stems having a comparative
and superlative meaning — or often also (and more originally) a merely intensive value — are made either directly
from roots (by primary derivation), or from other derivative
or compound stems (by secondary derivation).
a. The subject of comparison belongs more properly to the chapter of
derivation; but it stands in such near relation to inflection that it is, in
accordance with the usual custom in grammars, conveniently and suitably
enough treated briefly here.
467. The suffixes of primary derivation are ^7JHf īyas
(or ^JÍīī īyāṃs) for the comparative and iṣṭha for the
superlative. The root before them is accented, and usually
strengthened by gunating, if capable of it — or, in some
cases, by nasalization or prolongation. They are much more
frequently and freely used in the oldest language than
later; in the classical Sanskrit, only a limited number of
such comparatives and superlatives are accepted in use; and
these attach themselves in meaning for the most part to
other adjectives from the same root, which seem to be
their corresponding positives; but in part also they are
artificially connected with other words, unrelated with them
in derivation.
a. Thus, from √kṣip hurl come kṣépīyas and kṣépiṣṭha, which
belong in meaning to kṣiprá quick; from √vṛ encompass come várī¬
yas and váriṣṭha, which belong to urú broad; while, for example,
467—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 174
kánīyas and kániṣṭha are attached by the grammarians to yuvan
young, or álpa small; and várṣīyas and várṣiṣṭha to vṛddhá old.
468. From Veda and Brāhmaṇa together, considerably more than
a hundred instances of this primary formation in īyas and iṣṭha (in
many cases only one of the pair actually occurring) are to be quoted.
a. About half of these (in RV., the decided majority) belong, in
meaning as in form, to the bare root in its adjective value, as used especially at the end of compounds, but sometimes also independently: thus,
from √tap burn comes tápisṭha excessively burning; from √yaj offer come
yájīyas and yájiṣṭha better and best (or very well) sacrificing; from √yudh
fight comes yódhīyas fighting better; — in a few instances, the simple
root is also found used as corresponding positive: thus, jū́ hasty, rapid
with jávīyas and jáviṣṭha.
b. In a little class of instances (eight), the root has a preposition
prefixed, which then takes the accent: thus, ā́gamiṣṭha especially coming
hither; vícayiṣṭha best clearing away; — in a couple of cases (áśrami¬
ṣṭha, áparāvapiṣṭha, ástheyas), the negative particle is prefixed; —
in a single word (śámbhaviṣṭha), an element of another kind.
c. The words of this formation sometimes take an accusative object
(see 271 e).
d. But even in the oldest language appears not infrequently the
same attachment in meaning to a derivative adjective which (as pointed out above) is usual in the later speech.
e. Besides the examples that occur also later, others are met with
like váriṣṭha choicest (vára choice), bárhiṣṭha greatest (bṛhánt great),
óṣiṣṭha quickest (óṣam quickly"), and so on. Probably by analogy with
these, like formations are in a few cases made from the apparently radical
syllables of words which have no otherwise traceable root in the language)
thus, kradhīyas and kradhiṣṭha (K.) from kṛdhú, sthávīyas and
stháviṣṭha from sthūrá, śáśīyas (RV.) from śáśvant, áṇīyas (AV.)
and áṇiṣṭha (TS.) from aṇú; and so on. And yet again, in a few exceptional cases, the suffixes īyas and iṣṭha are applied to stems which are
themselves palpably derivative: thus, ā́śiṣṭha from āśú (RV.: only case),
tī́kṣṇīyas (AV.") from tīkṣṇá, bráhmīyas and bráhmiṣṭha (TS. etc.)
from bráhmon, dhármiṣṭha (TA.) from dhárman, dráḍhiṣṭha (TA.:
instead of dárhiṣṭha) from dṛḍhá, rághīyas (TS.) from roghu. The.se
are beginnings, not followed up later, of the extension of the formation
to unlimited use.
f. In návīyas or návyas and náviṣṭha, from náva new, and in
sányas from sána old (all RV.), we have also formations unconnected
with verbal roots.
469. The stems in iṣṭha are inflected like ordinary adjectives
in a, and make their feminines in ā; those in īyas have a peculiar
declension, which has been described above (463ff.).
175 COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES . [-471
470. Of peculiarities and irregularities of formation, the following may be noticed:
a. The suffix īyas has in a few instances the briefer form yas‚ generally as alternative with the other: thus, távīyas and távyas, návīyas
and návyas, vásīyas and vásyas, pánīyas and pányas; and so from
rabh and sah; sányas occurs alone. From bhū come bhū́yas and
bhū́yiṣṭha, beside which RV. has also bhávīyas.
b. Of roots in ā, the final blends with the initial of the suffix to e:
thus, sthéyas, dhéṣṭha, yéṣṭha; but such forms are in the Veda generally to be resolved, as dháïṣṭha, yáïṣṭha. The root jyā forms jyéṣṭha,
but jyā́yas (like bhū́yas).
c. The two roots in ī, prī and śrī, form préyas and préṣṭha and
śréyas and śréṣṭha.
d. From the root of ṛjú come, without strengthening, ṛ́jīyas and
ṛ́jiṣṭha; but in the older language also, more regularly, rájīyas and
rájiṣṭha.
471. The suffixes of secondary derivation are rlj tara
and rFT tama. They are of almost unrestricted application,
being added to adjectives of every form, simple and compound, ending in vowels or in consonants — and this from
the earliest period of the language until the latest. The
accent of the primitive remains (with rare exceptions) unchanged; and that form of stem is generally taken which
appears before an initial consonant of a case-ending (weak
or middle form).
a. Examples (of older as well as later occurrence) are: from
vowel-stems, priyátara, váhnitama, rathī́tara and rathī́tama (RV.),
cā́rutara, potṛ́tama, saṁraktatara; — from consonant-stems, śáṁ¬
tama, śáśvattama, mṛḍayáttama, tavástara and tavástama, tuvíṣ¬
ṭama, vápuṣṭara, tapasvítara, yaśasvítama, bhágavattara, hira¬
ṇyavāśīmattama; — from compounds, ratnadhā́tama, abhibhū́tara,
sukṛ́ttara, pūrbhíttama, bhūyiṣṭhabhā́ktama, bhūridā́vattara,
śúcivratatama, strīkāmatama.
b. But in the Veda the final n of a stem is regularly retained: thus,
madintara and madíntama, vṛṣántama; and a few stems even add a
nasal: thus, surabhíntara, rayíntama, madhuntama. In a case or
two, the strong stem of a present participle is taken: thus, vrā́dhanttama,
sáhanttama; and, of a perfect participle, the weakest stem: thus, vidúṣ¬
ṭara, mīḍhúṣṭama. A feminine final Ī is shortened: thus, devitamā
(RV.), tejasvinitamā (K.).
471—] V . NOUN S A N D ADJECTIVES . 176
c. In the older language, the words of this formation are not much
more frequent than those of the other: thus, in RV. the stems in tara
and tama are to those in īyas and iṣṭha as three to two; in AV., only
as six to five: but later the former win a great preponderance.
472. These comparatives and superlatives are inflected like
ordinary adjectives in a‚ forming their feminine in a.
473. a. That (especially in the Veda) some stems which are
nouns rather than adjectives form derivatives of comparison is natural
enough, considering the uncertain nature of the division-line between
substantive and adjective value. Thus, we have vīrátara, vīrátama,
váhnitama, mātṛ́tama, nṛ́tama, marúttama, and so on.
b. The suffixes tara and tama also make forms of comparison
from some of the pronominal roots, as ka, ya, i (see below, 520);
and from certain of the prepositions, as ud; and the adverbially used
accusative (older, neuter, -taram; later, feminine, -tarām) of a comparative in tara from a preposition is employed to make a corresponding comparative to the preposition itself (below, 1119); while
-tarām and -tamām make degrees of comparison from a few adverbs: thus, natarā́m, natamā́m, kathaṁtarām, kutastarām,
addhātamā́m, nīcāistarām, etc.
c. By a wholly barbarous combination, finding no warrant in the
earlier and more genuine usages of the language, the suffixes of comparison
in their adverbial feminine form, -tarām and -tamām, are later allowed
to be added to personal forms of verbs: thus, sīdatetarām (R.: the only
case noted in the epics) is more despondent, vyathayatitarām disturbs
more, alabhatatarām obtained in a higher degree, hasiṣyatitarām will
laugh more. No examples of this use of -tamām are quotable.
d. The suffixes of secondary comparison are not infrequently added
to those of primary, forming double comparatives and superlatives: thus,
garīyastara, śreṣṭhatara and śréṣṭhatama, pāpīyastara, pāpiṣṭha¬
tara and -tama, bhūyastaram, etc.
e. The use of tama as ordinal suffix is noted below (487); with
this value, it is accented on the final, and makes its feminine in ī:
thus, śatatamá m. n., śatatamīf.,hundredth.
474. From a few words, mostly prepositions, degrees of comparison are made by the briefer suffixes ra and ma: thus, ádhara
and adhamá, ápara and apamá, ávara and avamá, úpara and
upamá, ántara, ántama, paramá, madhyamá, caramá, antima,
ādima, paścima. And ma is also used to make ordinals (below, 487).
177 NUMERALS . [-475
CHAPTE R V I .
NUMERALS .
475. The simple cardinal numerals for the first ten
numbers (which are the foundation of the whole class),
with their derivatives, the tens, and with some of the higher
members of the decimal series, are as follows:
1 ~ ~ io 3~ loo SlcT
é k a dáś a śat á
2
“
2
o P&IÍH iooo Tf^pa
d v á viṃśat í sahásr a
3 30 T 10,000 STCJcT
t r í triṃśá t ayút a
4 4 0
^rflRVM ^ 100,000 ~ ~
catú r catvāriṃśá t lakṣ á
5 50 M^HUIH I‚ooo‚ooo CHJcT
páñc a pañcāśá t prayút a
6 "T~^ 60 10,000,000 ítf t
ṣ á ṣ ṣaṣṭ í kóṭ i
7
īīīī 70 īīcTÌH i o 8
sapt á saptat í arbud á
8 ws so sreffin i o 9 H^M<
aṣṭ á aśīt í mahārbud a
9 ^ 90 ictfo i o 1 0 T^ôf
náv a navat í kharv á
io ìoo CRT i o 1 1
f-Tl^ r
dáś a śat á nikharv a
a. The accent sapt á and aṣṭ á is that belonging to these words in all
accentuated texts; according to the grammarians, they are sápt a and áṣṭ a
in the later language. See below, 483.
b . T h e series of decimal numbers may be carried still further;
but there are great differences among the different authorities wit h
475—] VI. NUMERALS. 178
regard to their names; and there is more or less of discordance even
from ayuta on.
c. Thus, in the TS. and MS. we find ayúta, niyúta, prayúta,
árbuda, nyarbuda, samudrá, mádhya, ánta, parārdhá; K. reverses
the order of niyúta and prayúta, and inserts badva after nyarbuda
(reading nyarbudha): these are probably the oldest recorded series.
d. In modern time, the only numbers in practical use above thousand
are lokṣa (lac or lakh) and koṭi (crore); and an Indian sum is wont to
be pointed thus: 123,45,67,890, to signify 123 crores, 45 lakhs, 67 thousand, eight hundred and ninety.
e. As to the alleged stem-forms pañcan etc, see below, 484. As
to the form ṣakṣ instead of ṣaṣ, see above, 146b. The stem dva appears
in composition and derivation also as dvā and dvi; catúr in composition
is accented cátur. The older form of aṣṭa is aṣṭā: see below, 483.
Forms in -cat and -śati for the tens are occasionally interchanged: e. g.
viṃśat (MBh. R.), triṃśati (AB.), pañcāśati (RT.).
f. The other numbers are expressed by the various composition
and syntactical combination of those given above. Thus:
476. The odd numbers between the even tens are made by
prefixing the (accented) unit to the ten to which its value is to be
added: but with various irregularities. Thus:
a. eka in 11 becomes ekā, but is elsewhere unchanged;
b. dva becomes everywhere dvā; but in 42—72 and in 92 it is
interchangeable with dvi, and in 82 dvi alone is used;
c. for tri is substituted its nom. pi. masc. tráyas; but tri itself is
also allowed in 43—73 and in 93, and in 83 tri alone is used;
d. ṣaṣ becomes ṣo in 16, and makes the initial d of daśa lingual
(199 d); elsewhere itsfinal undergoes the regular conversion (226 b, 198 b)
to ṭ or ḍ or n ; and in 96 the n of navati is assimilated to it (199 c);
e. aṣṭa becomes aṣṭā (483) in 18—38, and has either form in the
succeeding combinations.
f. Thus:
11 ékadaça
12 dvā́daça
13 tráyodaça
14 cáturdaça
15 páñcadaça
16 ṣóḍaça
17 saptádaça
18 aṣṭā́daça
19 návadaça
31 ékatriṅçat
32 dvā́triṅçat
33 tráyastriṅçat
34 cátustriṅçat
35 páñcatriṅçat
36 ṣáṭtriṅçat
37 saptátriṅçat
38 aṣṭā́triṅçat
39 návatriṅçat
61
62<
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
ékaṣaṣṭi
dvā́ṣaṣṭi
dvíṣaṣṭi
tráyaḥṣaṣṭi
tríṣaṣṭi
cátuḥṣaṣṭi
páñcaṣaṣṭi
ṣáṭṣaṣṭi
saptáṣaṣṭi
aṣṭáṣaṣṭi
aṣṭā́ṣaṣṭi
návaṣaṣṭi
81 ékaçīti
82 dvyàçīti
83 tryàçīti
84 cáturaçīti
85 páñcāçīti
86 ṣáḍaçīti
87 saptā́çīti
88 aṣṭā́çīti
89 návāçīti
179 O D D NUMBERS . [—478
g. The numbers 21—29 are made like those for 31—39; the numbers
41—49, 51—59, 71—79, and 91—99 are made like those for 61—69.
h. The forms made with dvā and trayas are more usual than those
with dvi and tri‚ which are hardly to be quoted from the older literature
(V. and Br.). The forms made with aṣṭā (instead of aṣṭa) are alone found
in the older literature (483), and are usual in the later.
477. The above are the normal expressions for the odd numbers. But equivalent substitutes for them are also variously made.
Thus:
a. By use of the adjectives Una deficient and adhika redundant, in
composition with lesser numbers which are to be subtracted or added, and
either independently qualifying or (more usually) in composition with larger
numbers which are to be increased or diminished by the others: thus,
tryūnaṣaṣṭih sixty deficient by three (i. e. 57); aṣṭādhikanavatiḥ. ninety
increased by eight (i. e. 98); ekādhikaṁ śatam a hundred increased by
one (i. e. 101); pañconaṁ śatam 100 less 5 (i. e. 95). For the nines,
especially, such substitutes as ekonaviṃśatiḥ 20 less 1, or 19, are not
uncommon; and later the eka 1 is left off, and ūnaviṃśati etc. have
the same value.
b. A case-form of a smaller number, generally éka one is connected by ná not with a larger number from which it isto be deducted: thus,
ékayā ná triṃśát (ŚB. PB. KB.) not thirty by one (29); dvā́bhyāṁ
nā́ 'śītím (ŚB.) not eighty by two (78); pañcábhir ná catvā́ri śatā́ni
(ŚB.) not four hundred by five (395); ékasmān ná pañcāśát (in ordinal)
49 (TS.); ékasyāi(abl. fem.: 307 h) ná pañcāśát 49 (TS.); most often,
ékān (i. e. ékāt, irregular abl. for ékasmāt) ná viṃśatíḥ 19; ékān ná
śatám 99. This last form is admitted also in the later language; the
others are found in the Brāhmaṇas.
c. Instances of multiplication by a prefixed number are occasionally
met with: thus, triṣaptá thrice seven; triṇavá thrice nine; tridaśá
thrice ten.
d. Of course, the numbers to be added together may be expressed by
independent words, with connecting and: thus, náva ca navatíś ca, or
náva navatíś ca ninety and nine; dvāú ca viṃśatíś ca two and
twenty. But the connective is also (at least, in the older language) not
seldom omitted: thus, navatír náva 99; triṃśátaṁ trīn 33; aśītír
aṣṭāú 88.
478. The same methods are also variously used for forming
the odd numbers above 100. Thus:
a. The added number is prefixed to the other, and takes the accent:
for example, ékaśatam 101; aṣṭā́śatam 108; triṃśácchatam 130; aṣṭā¬
viṃśatiśatam 128; cátuḥsahasram (RV.: unless the accent is wrong)
1004; aśītisahasram 1080.
478—] VI. NUMERALS . 1 8 0
b. Or, the number to be added is compounded with adhika redundant,
and the compound is either made to qualify the other number or is further
compounded with it: thus, pañcādhikaṁ śatam or pañcādhikaśatam
105. Of course, Una deficient (as also other words equivalent to Una or
adhika) may be used in the same way: thus, pañconaṁ śatam 95,
ṣaṣṭiḥ pañcavarjitā 55; śatam abhyadhikaṁ ṣaṣṭitaḥ 160.
c. Syntactical combinations are made at convenience: for example,
dáśa śatáṁ ca 110; śatám ékaṁ ca 101.
479. Another usual method (beginning in the Brāhmaṇas) of
forming the odd numbers above 100 is to qualify the larger number
by an adjective derived from the smaller, and identical with the
briefer ordinal (below, 487): thus, dvādaśáṁ śatám, 112 (lit'ly a
hundred of a 12-sort, or characterised by 12); catuścatvāriṃśáṁ śatám
144; ṣaṭṣaṣṭáṁ śatám 166.
480. To multiply one number by another, among the higher
or the lower denominations, the simplest and least ambiguous method
is to make of the multiplied number a dual or plural, qualified by
the other as any ordinary noun would be; and this method is a common one in all ages of the language. For example: páñca pañcā¬
śátasfwe fifties {250); náva navatáyas nine nineties (810); aśītíbhis
tisṛ́bhis with three eighties {240) ; páñca śatā́ni five hundreds; trī́ṇisahásrāṇi three thousands; ṣaṣṭíṁ sahásrāṇi 60,000; daśa ca sahas–
rāṇy aṣṭāu ca śatāni 10,800: and, combined with addition, trīṇi
śatā́ni tráyastriṃśataṁ ca 333; sahasre dve pañconaṁ śatam eva
ca 2095.
a. In an exceptional case or two, the ordinal form appears to take
the place of the cardinal as multiplicand in a like combination: thus, ṣaṭ¬
triṃśā́ṃś ca catúrah (RV.) 36x4 (lit. four of the thirty-six kind);
trī́ṃr ekādaśā́n (RV.) or traya ekādaśāsaḥ (ŚŚS. viii. 21. 1) 11x3.
b. By a peculiar and wholly illogical construction, such a combination
as trīṇi ṣaṣṭiśatāni, which ought to signify 480 (3x100 + 60), isrepeatedly used in the Brāhmaṇas to mean 360 (3x100 + 60); so also dvé
catustriṃśé śaté 234 (not 268); dvāṣaṣṭāni trīṇi śatāni 362; and
other like cases. And even R. has trayaḥ śataśatārdhāh 350.
481. But the two factors, multiplier and multiplied, are also,
and in later usage more generally, combined into a compound (accented on the final); and this is then treated as an adjective, qualifying the numbered noun; or else its neuter or feminine (in ī) singular is used substantively: thus, daśaśatā́s 7ooo; ṣaṭśatāiḥ padā¬
tibhih (MBh.) with 600 foot-soldiers; tráyastriṃśat triśatā́ḥ ṣaṭ¬
sahasrā́ḥ (AV.) 6333; dviśatám or dviśatī 200; aṣṭādaśaśatī 7<Soo.
a. In the usual absence of accentuation, there arises sometimes a
question as to how a compound number shall be understood: whether asṭa¬
śatam, for example, is aṣṭáśatam 108 or aṣṭaśatám 800, and the like.
181 INFLECTION . [—482
482. Inflection. The inflection of the cardinal numerals is in many respects irregular. Gender is distinguished only by the first four.
a. Eka one is declined after the manner of a pronominal adjective (like sárva, below, 524); its plural is used in the sense of some,
certain ones. Its dual does not occur.
b. Occasional forms of the ordinary declension are met with: thus,
éke (loc. sing.), ékāt (477 b).
c In the late literature, eka is used in the sense of a certain,
or even sometimes almost of a, as an indefinite article. Thus, eko
vyāghraḥ (H.) a certain tiger; ekasmin dine on a certain day; haste
daṇḍam ekam ādāya (H.) taking a stick in his hand.
d. Dva two is dual only, and is entirely regular: thus, N. A. V.
dvāú (dvā́, Veda) m., dvé i. n.; I. D . Ab. dvā́bhyām; G. L. dváyos.
e. Tri three is in masc and neut. nearly regular, like an ordinary stem in i ; but the genitive is as if from trayá (only in the
later language: the regular trīṇā́m occurs once in RV.). For the
feminine it has the peculiar stem tisṛ́, which is inflected in general
like an ṛ-stem; but the nom. and accus. are alike, and show no
strengthening of the ṛ; and the ṛ is not prolonged in the gen. (excepting in the Veda). Thus:
m. n. f.
N. tráyas trī́ṇi tisrás
A. trī́n trī́ṇi tisrás
I. tribhís tisṛ́bhis
D. Ab. tribhyás tisṛ́bhyas
G. trayāṇā́m tisṛṇā́m
L. triṣú tisṛ́ṣu
f. The Veda has the abbreviated neut. nom. and accus. trī́. The
accentuation tisṛbhís, 4
tisṛbhyás, tisṛ́ṇām, and tisṛṣú is said to be
also allowed in the later language. The stem tisṛ occurs in composition
in tisṛdhanvá (B.) a bow with three arrows.
g. Catúr four has catvā́r (the more original form) in the strong
cases; in the fem. it substitutes the stem cátasṛ, apparently akin
with tisṛ́, and inflected like it (but with anomalous change of accent,
like that in the higher numbers: see below, 483). Thus:
m. n. f.
N. catvā́ras catvā́ri cátasras
A. catúras catvā́ri cátasras
I. catúrbhis catasṛ́bhis
D . Ab. catúrbhyas catasṛ́bhyas
G. caturṇā́m catasṛṇām
L. catúrṣu catasṛ́ṣu.
482--] VI. NUMERALS. 182
h. The use of n before ām of the gen. masc. and neut. after a final
consonant of the stem is (as in ṣaṣ: below, 483) a striking irregularity.
The more regular gen. fem. catasṛṇām also sometimes occurs. In the
later language, the accentuation of the final syllable instead of the penult
is said to be allowed in inst., dat.-abl., and loc.
483. The numbers from 5 to 19 have no distinction of gender,
nor any generic character. They are inflected, somewhat irregularly,
as plurals, save in the nom.-acc, where they have no proper plural
form, but show the bare stem instead. Of ṣáṣ (as of catúr), nām
is the gen. ending, with mutual assimilation (198 b) of stem-final and
initial of the termination. Aṣṭá (as accented in the older language)
has an alternative fuller form, aṣṭā́, which is almost exclusively used
in the older literature (V. and B.), both in inflection and in composition (but some compounds with aṣṭa are found as early as the AV.);
its nom.-acc. is aṣṭá (usual later: found in RV. once, and in AV.),
or aṣṭā́ (RV.), or aṣṭāú (most usual in RV.; also in AV., B., and
later).
a. The accent is in many respects peculiar. In all the accented texts,
the stress of voice lies on the penult before the endings bhis, bhyas, and
su, from the stems in a, whatever be the accent of the stem: thus, pañ¬
cábhis from páñca, navábhyas from náva, daśásu from dáśa, nava¬
daśábhis from návadaśa, ekādaśábhyas from ékādaśa, dvādaśásu
from dvā́daśa (according to the grammarians, either the penult or the
final is accented in these forms in the later language). In the gen. pi.,
the accent is on the ending (as in that of i-, u-, and ṛ-stems): thus, pañ¬
cadaśānā́m, saptadaśānā́m. The cases of ṣaṣ, and those made from
the stem-form aṣṭā, have the accent throughout upon the ending.
b. Examples of the inflection of these words are as follows:
N. A. páñca ṣáṭ aṣṭāú aṣṭá
I. pañcábhis ṣaḍbhís aṣṭābhís aṣṭábhis
D. Ab. pañcábhyas ṣaḍbhyás aṣṭābhyás aṣṭábhyas
G. pañcānā́m ṣaṇṇā́m aṣṭānā́m
L. pañcásu ṣaṭsú aṣṭāsú aṣṭásu.
c. Saptà (in the later language sápta, as áṣṭa for aṣṭá) and náva
and dáśa, with the compounds of dáśa (íi—29), are declined like páñca,
and with the same shift of accent (or with alternative shift to the endings,
as pointed out above).
484. The Hindu grammarians give to the stems for 5 and 7—19 a
final n: thus, pañcan, saptan, aṣṭan, navan, daśan, and ekādaśan
etc. This, however, has nothing to do with the demonstrably original final
nasal of 7, 9, and 10 (compare septem, novem, decem; seven, nine,
ten); it is only owing to the fact that, starting from such a stem-form,
their inflection is made to assume a more regular aspect, the nom.-acc.
having the form of a neut. sing, in an, and the instr., dat.-abl., and loc.
that of a neut. or masc. pi. in an: compare nama, nā́mabhis, nā́ma–
1 8 3 INFLECTION . [—487
bhyas, nā́masu — the gen. alone being, rather, like that of an a-stem:
compare daśōnā́m with índrāṇām and nā́mnām or ātmánām. No trace
whatever of a final n is found anywhere in the language, in inflection or
derivation or composition, from any of these words (though ŚB. has twice
daśaṁdaśín, for the usual daśadaśín).
485. a. The tens, viṃśatí and triṃśát etc, with their compounds, are declined regularly, as feminine stems of the same endings,
and in all numbers.
b. Śatá and sahásra are declined regularly, as neuter (or, rarely,
in the later language, as masculine) stems of the same final, in all
numbers.
o. The like is true of the higher numbers — which have, indeed, no proper numeral character, but are ordinary nouns.
486. Construction. As regards their construction with the
nouns enumerated by them —
a. The words for I to J9 are in the main used adjectively,
agreeing in case, and, if they distinguish gender, in gender also, with
the nouns: thus, daśábhir vīrāíh with ten heroes; yé devā́ divy
ékādaśa sthá (AV.) what eleven gods of you are in heaven; pañcásu
jáneṣu among the five tribes; catasṛ́bhir gīrbhíḥ with fowr songs.
Rarely occur such combinations as dáśa kaláśānām (RV.) ten pitchers,
ṛtūnāṁ ṣaṭ (R.) six seasons.
b. The numerals above 19 are construed usually as nouns, either
taking the numbered noun as a dependent genitive, or standing in
the singular in apposition with it: thus, śataṁ dāsīḥ or śataṁ
dāsīnām a hundred slaves or a hundred of slaves; viṃśatyā́ háribhiḥ
with twenty bays; ṣaṣṭyā́ṁ śarátṣu in 60 autumns; catena pā́śāih
with a hundred fetters; śatáṁ sahásram ayútaṁ nyàrbudaṁ ja¬
ghā́na śakró dásyūnām (AV.) the mighty [Indra] slew a hundred, a
thousand, a myriad, a hundred million, of demons. Occasionally they
are put in the plural, as if used more adjectively: thus, pañcāśad¬
bhir bāṇāiḥ with fifty arrows.
c. In the older language, the numerals for 5 and upward are
sometimes used in the nom.-ace form (or as if indeclinably) with
other cases also: thus, páñca kṛṣṭíṣu among the five races; saptá
rṣīṇām of seven bards; sahásram ṛ́ṣibhih with a thousand bards;
śatám pūrbhíḥ with a hundred strongholds. Sporadic instances of a
like kind are also met with later.
487. Ordinals. Of the classes of derivative words
coming from the original or cardinal numerals, the ordinals are by far the most important; and the mode of their
formation may best be explained here.
487—] VI. NUMERALS. 184
Some of the first ordinals are irregularly made: thus,
a. éka l forms no ordinal; instead is usedíprathamá (i. e. pra¬
tama foremost); ādya (from ādi beginning) appears first in the Sūtras,
and ādima much later;
b. from dvá 2, and tri 3, come dvitī́ya and tṛtī́ya (secondarily,
through dvita and abbreviated trita);
c. catúr 4, ṣáṣ 6, and saptá 7, take the ending tha: thus,
caturthá, ṣaṣṭhá, saptátha; but for fourth are used also turī́ya and
turya, and saptátha belongs to the older language only; pañcatha,
forfifth, is excessively rare;
d. the numerals for 5 and 7 usually, and for 8, 9, 10, add ma,
forming pañcamá, saptamá, aṣṭamá, navamá, daśamá;
e. for llth to 19fh, the forms are ekādaśá, dvādaśá, and so
on (the same with the cardinals, except change of accent); but ekā¬
daśama etc. occasionally occur also;
f. for the tens and intervening odd numbers from 20 onward,
the ordinal has a double form — one made by adding the full (superlative) ending tamá to the cardinal: thus, viṃśatitamá, triṃśat¬
tamá, aśītitamá, etc.; the other, shorter, in a, with abbreviation of
the cardinal: thus, viṃśá 20th; triṃśá 30th; catvāriṃśá 40th; pañ¬
cāśá 50th; ṣaṣṭá 60th; saptatá 7oth; aśītá 80th; navatá 90th;
and so likewise ekaviṃśá 21st, catustriṃśá 34th; aṣṭācatvāriṃśá
48th; dvāpañcāśá 52d; ekaṣaṣṭá 61st; and ekānnaviṃśá and ūna¬
viṃśá and ekonaviṃśá 19th; — and so on. Of these two forms,
the latter and briefer is by far the (more common, the other being not
quotable from the Veda, and extremely rarely from the Brāhmaṇas.
From 5oth on, the briefer form is allowed by the grammarians only
to the odd numbers, made up of tens and units; but it is sometimes
met with, even in the later language, from the simple ten.
g. Of the higher numbers, śatá and sahásra form śatatamá
and sahasratamá; but their compounds have also the simpler form:
thus, ekaśatá or ekaśatatama 101st.
h. Of the ordinals, prathamá (and ādya), dvitīya, tṛtī́ya, and
turī́ya (with túrya) form their feminine in ā; all the rest make it
in ī.
488. The ordinals, as in other languages, have other than ordinal
offices to fill; and in Sanskrit especially they are general adjectives to the
cardinals, with a considerable variety of meanings, as fractionals, as signifying composed of so many parts or so-many-fold, or containing so mor (as was seen above, 479) having so many added.
a. In a fractional sense, the grammarians direct that their accent be
shifted to the first syllable: thus, dvítīya half; tṛ́tīya third part; cátur¬
tha quarter; and so on. But in accented texts only tṛ́tīya third, and
cáturtha (ŚB.) and túrīya quarter, are found so treated; for half occurs
185 NUMERA L DERIVATIVES . [—491
only ardhá; and caturthá (MS. etc.), pañcamá, and so on, are accented as in their ordinal use.
489. There are other numeral derivatives: thus —
a. multiplicative adverbs, as dvis twice, tris thrice, catús fowr
times;
b. adverbs with the suffixes dhā (1104) and śas (1106): for
example, ekadhā́ in one way, śatadhā́ in a hundred ways; ekaśas
one by one, śataśás by hundreds; /•Ì .'- K A,'
c. collectives, as dvitaya or dvayá a pairi} dáśataya or daśát
a decade; '
d. adjectives like dvika composed of two, pañcaka consisting of
five or jives;
and SO on; but their treatment belongs rather to the dictionary, or
to the chapter on derivation.
CHAPTE R VII .
PRONOUNS.
490. T HE pronouns differ from the great mass of nouns
and adjectives chiefly in that they come by derivation from
another and a very limited set of roots, the so-called pronominal or demonstrative roots. But they have also many
and marked peculiarities of inflection — some of which,
however, find analogies in a few adjectives; and such adjectives will accordingly be described at the end of this
chapter.
Personal Pronouns.
491. The pronouns of the first and second persons are
the most irregular and peculiar of all, being made up of
fragments coming from various roots and combinations of
roots. They have no distinction of gender.
491—] VII . PRONOUNS . 1 8 6
a. Their inflection in the later language is as follows:
Singular:
1st pers. 2d pers.
N.
A.
I.
D.
Ab.
G.
L.
Dual:
N. A. V.
I. D. Ab.
G. L.
and A.D.G.
Plural:
N.
A.
I.
D.
ahám
mām, m ā
TOT
máy ā
máhyam, me
TO
m á t
TO, ïï
máma , me
TOT
mäy i
MWIH
āvā́m
āvā́bhyām
āváyos
-ft
n ā u
TOÏÏ
vayám
asmā́n, nas
^HIIPTÏÏ^
asmā́bhis
W-Iïï » TO
asmábhyam, nas
(TO
tvám
tvā́m, t v ā
tváy ā
túbhyam, te
(TO
tvá t
TO, ?T
táva , te
(TOT
tváy i
TOTïï
yuvā́m
TOFïïTïï
yuvā́bhyām
ïïTOTïï
yuváyo s
TOT
v ām
ïïïïïï
yūyám
ïï~TO‚ TO
yuṣmā́n, vas
Uc-HlÍTO
yuṣmā́bhis
ïï^-FTO, TO
yuṣmábhyam, vas
187 PERSONA L PRONOUNS. [—493
Ab. ŚTFīīrT U-Hrt
asmát yuṣmát
asmā́kam, nas yuṣmā́kam, vas
L. –"īīTTT īī"TTīī
asmā́su yuṣmā́su
b. The briefer second forms for accus., dat., and gen., in all
numbers, are accentless; and hence they are not allowed to stand at
the beginning of a sentence, or elsewhere where any emphasis is laid.
c. But they may be qualified by accented adjuncts, as adjectives: e. g.
te jáyatah of thee when a conqueror, vo vṛtā́bhyaḥ for you that were
confined, nas tribhyáḥ to us three (all RV.).
d. The ablative mat is accentless in one or two AV. passages.
492. Forms of the older language. All the forms given
above are found also in the older language; which, however, has also
others that afterward disappear from use.
a. Thus, wefinda few times the instr. sing, tvā́ (only RV. : like
manīṣā́ for manīṣáyā); further, the loc. or dat. sing, mé (only VS.)
and tvé, and the dat. or loc. pi. asmé (which is by far the commonest
of these e-forms) and yuṣmé: their final e is uncombinable (or pra¬
gṛhya: 138 b). The VS. makes twice the acc. pi. fem. yuṣmā́s (as if
yuṣmā́n were too distinctively a masculine form). The datives in bhyam
are in a number of cases written, and in yet others to be read asif written, with bhya, with loss of the final nasal; and in a rare instance or two
we have in like manner asmā́ka and yuṣmā́ka in the gen. plural. The
usual resolutions of semivowel to vowel are made, and are especially frequent in the forms of the second person (tuám for tvám etc.).
b. But the duals, above all, wear a very different aspect earlier. In
Veda and Brāhmaṇa and Sūtra the nominatives are (with occasional
exceptions) āvám and yuvám, and only the accusatives āvā́m and yuvā́m
(but in RV. the dual forms of 1st pers. chance not to occur, unless in
vā́m[?], once, for āvám); the instr. in RV. is either yuvábhyām (occurs
also once in ACS.) or yuvā́bhyām; an abl. yuvát appears once in RV.,
and āvát twice in TS.; the gen.-loc. is in RV. (only) yuvós instead of
yuváyos. Thus we have here a distinction (elsewhere unknown) of five
different dual cases, by endings in part accordant with those of the other
two numbers.
493. Peculiar endings. The ending am, appearing in the nom.
sing, and pI. (and Vedic du.) of these pronouns, will be found often,
though only in sing., among the other pronouns. The bhyam (or hyam)
of dat. sing, and pI. is met with only here; its relationship with the
bhyām, bhyas, bhis of the ordinary declension is palpable. The t (or
493—] VII. PRONOUNS . 188
d) of the abl., though here preceded by a short vowel, is doubtless the
same with that of the a-declension of nouns and adjectives. That the nom.,
dat., and abl. endings should be the same in sing, and pi. (and in part
in the earlier du. also), only the stem to which they are added being different, is unparalleled elsewhere in the language. The element sma appearing in the plural forms will be found frequent in the inflection of the
singular in other pronominal words: in fact, the compound stem asma
which underlies the plural of aham seems to be the same that furnishes
part of the singular forms of ayam (501), and its value of we to be a
specialisation of the meaning these persons. The genitives singular, máma
and táva, have no analogies elsewhere; the derivation from them of the
adjectives māmaka and tāvaka (below, 516 a) suggests the possibility
of their being themselves stereotyped stems. The gen. pi., asmā́kam and
yuṣmā́kam, are certainly of this character: namely, neuter sing, caseforms of the adjective stems asmāka and yuṣmāka, other cases of which
are found in the Veda.
494. Stem-forms. To the Hindu grammarians, the stems of
the personal pronouns are mad and asmad, and tvad and yuṣmad,
because these are forms used to a certain extent, and allowed to be
indefinitely used, in derivation and composition (like tad, kad, etc.:
see below, under the other pronouns). Words are thus formed from
them even in the older language — namely, mátkṛta and mátsakhi
and asmátsakhi (RV.), tvádyoni and mattás (AV.), tvátpitṛ and
tvádvivācana (TS.), tvátprasūta and tvaddevatyà and yuvad¬
devatyà and yuṣmaddevatyà (ŚB.), asmaddevatya (PB.); but much
more numerous are those that show the proper stem in a‚ or with
the a lengthened to ā: thus, mā́vant; asmatrā́, asmadrúh, etc.;
tváyata, tvā́vant, tvā́datta, tvōníd, tvā́vasu, tvā́hata, etc.; yuṣ¬
mā́datta, yuṣméṣita, etc.; yuvā́vant, yuvā́ku, yuvádhita, yuvā́¬
datta, yuvā́nīta, etc. And the later language also has a few words
made in the same way, as mādṛś.
a. The Vedas have certain more irregular combinations, with complete
forms: thus, tvā́ṁkāma, tvāmāhuti, māmpaśyá, mamasatyá, asmé¬
hiti, ahampūrvá, ahamuttará, ahaṁyú, ahaṁsana.
b. From the stems of the grammarians come also the derivative
adjectives madī́ya, tvadī́ya, asmadī́ya, yuṣmadī́ya, having a possessive value: see below, 516.
c For sva and svayám, see below, 513.
Demonstrative Pronouns.
495. The simplest demonstrative, H ta, which answers
also the purpose of a personal pronoun of the third person,
may be taken as model of a mode of declension usual in
189 DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS. [—495
so many pronouns and pronominal adjectives that it is
fairly to be called the general pronominal declension.
a. But this root has also the special irregularity that in the
nom. sing. masc. and fem. it has sás (for whose peculiar euphonic
treatment see 176 a, b) and sā́, instead of tás and tā́ (compare Gr.
b, TJ} To, and Goth, sa, so, thata). Thus:
Singular:
m. n. f.
N. TO HcT īīT
"X *X
sás tat sā́
A. cTīī cTcT rīīīī
*N -X -X
tàm tat tā́m
I. (TOT
téna táyā
D. r T R cTHÌ"
tásmāi tásyāi
Ab. rTFTīīT rTHTÍīī
"X *\
tásmāt tàsyās
0. cTRT rTHTFT
-x
tásya tásyās
L. rriWT cTH7Ff
*x -x
tásmin tásyām
Dual:
N.A.V . flT cT cT
tāú té té
1. D. Ab. rTRTF T rTT^TfTīī
•x ^ «x
tā́bhyām tā́bhyām
0. L. mm mm
-X -x
táyos táyos
PluTal:
N. ft cīīR cTTīī
•x
té tā́ni tā́s
A. (TFT cīīfà rTTīī
-x -X
1.tā́ntāísfltī^tā́nitā́rüPTtā́bhiss^
495—] VII . PRONOUNS. 1 9 0
b. The Vedas show no other irregularities of inflection than those
which belong to all stems in a and ā: namely, ténā sometimes; usually
tā́ for tāú, du.; often tā́ for tā́ni, pi. neut.; usually tébhis for tāís,
instr. pi.; and the ordinary resolutions. The RV. has one more case-form
from the root sa, namely sásmin (occurring nearly half as often as tás¬
min); and ChU. has once sasmāt.
496. The peculiarities of the general pronominal declension, it
will be noticed, are these:
a. In the singular, the use of t (properly d) as ending of nom.-acc.
neut.; the combination of another element sma with the root in masc. and
neut. dat., abl., and loc, and of sy in fem. dat., abl.-gen., and loc; and
the masc. and neut. loc ending in, which is restricted to this declension
(except in the anomalous yādṛ́śmin, RV., once). The substitution in B.
of āi for ās as fem. ending (307 h) was illustrated at 365 d.
b. The dual is precisely that of noun-stems in a and ā.
c. In the plural, the irregularities are limited to té for tas in nom.
masc, and the insertion of s instead of n before ām of the gen., the stemfinal being treated before it in the same manner as before su of the loc.
497. The stem of this pronoun is by the grammarians given
as tad; and from that form come, in fact, the derivative adjective
tadī́ya, with tattvá, tadvat, tanmaya; and numerous compounds,
such as tacchīla, tajjña, tatkara, tadanantara, tanmātra, etc.
These compounds are not rare even in the Veda: so tádanna, tadvíd,
tadvaśá, etc. But derivatives from the true root ta are also many:
especially adverbs, as tátas, tátra, táthā, tadā́; the adjectives tā́¬
vant and táti; and the compound tādṛ́ś etc.
498. Though the demonstrative root ta is prevailingly of the
third person, it is also freely used, both in the earlier language and
in the later, as qualifying the pronouns of the first and second person, giving emphasis to them: thus, so 'hám, thisJ, or I here; sá
or sā́ tvám thou there; te vayam, we here; tasya mama of me here,
tasmiṃs tvayi in thee there, and so on.
499. T WO other demonstrative stems appear to contain ta as
an element; and both, like the simple ta, substitute sa in the nom
sing. masc. and fem.
D. Ab. rTPTfTT
tébhyas tā́bhyas
0. ?T~īīī rTTīīīīT
téṣām tā́sām
I.- ?T~ cTTīī
o o
téṣu tā́su
191 DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS. [—501
m. n. f.
Sing. A. enam enat enām
I. enena enayā
Du. A. enāu ene ene
0. L. enayos enayos
PI. A. enān enāni enas
a. The RV. has enos instead of enayos, and in one or two instances accents a form: thus, enā́m, enā́s(?). AB. uses enat also as nom.
neut.
b. As ena is always used substantively, it has more nearly than ta
the value of a third personal pronoun, unemphatic. Apparent examples
of its adjectival use here and there met with are doubtless the result of
confusion with eta (499 b).
c. This stem forms neither derivatives nor compounds.
501. The declension of two other demonstratives is so
irregularly made up that they have to be given in full. The
one, ^TFT^ayam etc., is used as a more indefinite demonstrative, this or that; the other, 35fHT asāú etc., signifies
especially the remoter relation, yon or yonder.
a. They are as follows:
a. The one, tya‚ is tolerably common (although only a third
of its possible forms occur) in RV., but rare in AV., and almost
unknown later, its nom. sing., in the three genders, is syás, syā́,
tyát, and it makes the accusatives tyám, tyā́m, tyát, and goes on
through the remaining cases in the same manner as ta. It has in
RV. the instr.fem.tyā́ (for tyáyā). Instead of syā as nom. sing,
fem. is also found tyā.
b. The other is the usual demonstrative of nearer position, this
here, and is in frequent use through all periods of the language.
It prefixes e to the simple root, forming the nominatives eṣás, eṣā́,
etát — and so on through the whole inflection.
c The stem tya has neither compounds nor derivatives. But
from eta are formed both, in the same manner as from the simple
ta, only much less numerous: thus, etaddā́ (ŚB.), etadartha, etc.,
from the so-called stem etat; and etādṛ́ś and etā́vant from eta.
And eṣa, like sa (498), is used to qualify pronouns of the 1st and
2d persons: e. g. eṣā 'ham, ete vayam.
500. There is a defective pronominal stem, ena, which is accent¬
less, and hence used only in situations where no emphasis falls upon
it. It does not occur elsewhere than in the accusative of all numbers, the instr. sing., and the gen.-loc. dual: thus,
VII . PRONOUNS . 192
Singular:
m. n. f. m. n. f.
ayám idám iyám asā ú adá s asā ú
A . ^tīī ^ <īīt\ ~ ‚ ~ l . ~ 1
imám idám i m am amúm adá s amū́m
I. WUJĪ WFH WiïJl
o o
anén a anáy ā amún ā amúy ā
asmā í asyā í amúṣmā i amúṣyā i
Ab. MWIH -"FīīīīT ^īī^TīīT ---TWTīī
*N *N O -N O *s
asmā́t asyā́s amúsmā t amúṣyā s
0. wn muh « -~f~rm
•s o o «s
asyá asyā́s amúṣy a amúṣyā s
L. ^TF H 5FOTīī MHÍ^HH WmīR
*N *N O –\ O *X
asmí n asyā́m amúsmi n amúṣyām
Dual:
N.A. ^ ^ĪĪ ~ q
imā ú i mé imé a m ú
1. D. Ab. 5TRTīīī WTTīīT
ābhyā́m amū́bhyām
G. L. wmm wmm
anáyo s amúyo s
Plural:
N. <íf ^TTH ^TīH^ 5P-x EPTīī^
i mé imā́ni imā́s amī́ amū́ni amū́s
A. sqFf S-TTH 3īīTīī EP-R SP-FÍīī ~ m
> –s ~ “ –s (Ts-sers . c\-s
imā́n imā́ni imā́s amū́n amū́ni amū́s
ebhís ābhís amíbhis amubhis
D. Ab. TTV—— ~^lTī ī ^HV-JH -"^7Tīī
ebhyá s ābhyá s amī́bhyas amū́bhyas
0. OTT" mm MHÌNIH ~~nq
eṣā́m āsā́m amī́ṣām amū́ṣām
eṣú ā s ú amī́ṣu amū́ṣu
501—]
193 DEMONSTRATIVES. [—503
b. The same forms are used in the older language, without variation,
except that (as usual) imā́ occurs for imāú and imā́ni, and amū́ for
amū́ni; amuyā when used adverbially is accented on the final, amuyā́;
asāu (with accent, of course, on the first, ásāu, or without accent, asāu:
314) is used also as vocative; ami, too, occurs as vocative.
502. a. The former of these two pronouns, ayám etc., plainly shows
itself to be pieced together from a number of defective stems. The majority
of forms come from the root a, with which, as in the ordinary pronominal
declension, sma (f. sy) is combined in the singular. A l l these forms from
a have the peculiarity that in their substantive use they are either accented, as in the paradigm, or accentless (like ena and the second forms from
ahám and tvám). The remaining forms are always accented. From aná
come, with entire regularity, anéna, anáyā, anáyos. The strong cases
in dual and plural, and in part in singular, come notless regularly from a
stem imá. And ayám, iyám, idám are evidently to be referred to a
simple root i (idám being apparently a double form: id, like tad etc.,
with ending am).
b. The Veda has from the root a also the instrumental enā́ and ayā́
(used in general adverbially), and the gen. loc. du. ayós; from ima,
imásya occurs once in RV., imasmāi in AA, , and imāis and imeṣu
later. The RV. hasin a small number of instances the irregular accentuation ásmāi, ásya, ā́bhis.
c. In analogy with the other pronouns, idám is by the grammarians regarded as representative stem of this pronominal declension; and itis actually found so treated in a very small number of
compounds (idammáya and idáṁrūpa are ofBrāhmaṇa age). As
regards the actual stems, ana furnishes nothing further; from ima
comes only the adverb imáthā (RV-, once); but a and i furnish a
number of derivatives, mostly adverbial: thus, for example, átas,
átra, átha, ad-dhā́(?); itás, id (Vedic particle), idā, ihá, ítara, īm
(Vedic particle), īdṛ́ś, perhaps evá and evám, and others.
503. The other pronoun, asāú etc., has amú for its leading stem,
which in the singular takes in combination, like the a-stems, the element
sma (f. sy), and which shifts to ami in part of the masc. and neut.
plural. In part, too, like an adjective u-stem, it lengthens its final in the
feminine. The gen. sing, amúṣya is the only example in the language
of the ending sya added to any other than an a-stem. The nom. pi. ami
is unique in form; itsī is (like that of a dual) pragṛhya, or exempt
from combination with a following vowel (138b). Asāú and adás are
also without analogies as regards their endings.
a. The grammarians, as usual, treat adás as representative stem
of the declension, and it is found in this character in an extremel
small number of words, as adomūla; adomáya is of Brāhmaṇa ag
The ŚB. has also asāunā́man. But most of the derivatives, as
503—] VII . PRONOUNS. 194
the cases, come from amu:thus, amútas, amútra, amútha, amudā,
amúrhi, amuvát, amuka.
b. In the older language occurs the root tva (accentless), meaning
one, many a one; it is oftenest found repeated, as one and another. It flows the ordinary pronominal declension. From it is made the (also accent¬
less) adverb tvadānīm (MS.),
c. Fragments of another demonstrative root or two are met with: thus,
ámas he occurs in a formula in AV. and in Brāhmaṇas etc.; avós as
gen.-loc. dual is found in RV.; the particle u points to a root u.
interrogative Pronoun.
504. The characteristic part of the interrogative pronominal root is ~^ k; it has the three forms f ka, "Pfi ki,
ōfí ku; but the whole declensional inflection is from
—
ka,
excepting the nom.-acc. sing, neut., which is from fêfí ki‚
and has the anomalous form föìīī^ kim (not elsewhere known
in the language from a neuter i-stem). The nom. and
accus. sing., then, are as follows:
m. n. f.
N . ~~ M ī ī ~ T
kás kím kā́
A . ~ q FFīīī ~Tīī
*\ -N *N
kam kím kam
and the rest of the declension is precisely like that of <T
ta (above, 495).
a. The Veda has its usual variations, kā́ and kébhis for kā́ni and
kāís. It also has, along with kím, the pronominally regular neuter kád;
and kam (or kam) is a frequent particle. The masc form kis, corresponding to kim, occurs as a stereotyped case in the combinations nákis
and makis.
505. The grammarians treat kim as representative stem of
the interrogative pronoun; and it is in fact so used in a not large
number of words, of which a few — kimmáya, kiṁkará, kiṁkāmyā́,
kíṁdevata, kiṁśīlá, and the peculiar kiṁyú — go back even to
the Veda and Brāhmaṇa. In closer analogy with the other pronouns,
the form kad‚ a couple of times in the Veda (katpayá, kádartha),
and not infrequently later, is found as first member of compounds.
Then, from the real roots ka‚ ki, ku are made many derivatives;
and from ki and ku, especially the latter, many compounds: thus,
195 RELATIVES . [—509
káti, kathá, kathám, kadá, katará, katamá, kárhi; kíyant, kīdṛ́ś;
kútas, kútra, kúha, kvà, kucará, kukarman, kumantrin, etc.
506. Various forms of this pronoun, as kad‚ kim‚ and ku (and,
rarely, koi, at the beginning of compounds, have passed from an
interrogative meaning, through an exclamatory, to the value of prefixes signifying an unusual quality — either something admirable, or,
oftener, something contemptible. This use begins in the Veda, but
becomes much more common in later time.
507. The interrogative pronoun, as in other languages, turns
readily in its independent use also to an exclamatory meaning.
Moreover, it is by various added particles converted to an indefinite
meaning: thus, by ca, caná, cid, ápi, vā, either alone or with the
relative ya (below, 511) prefixed: thus, káś caná any one; ná kó
*pi not any owe; yā́ni kā́ni cit whatsoever; yatamát katamác ca
whatever one. Occasionally, the interrogative by itself acquires a similar value.
Relative Pronoun.
508. The root of the relative pronoun is ET ya, which
from the earliest period of the language has lost all trace
of the demonstrative meaning originally (doubtless) belonging
to it, and is used as relative only.
509. It is inflected with entire regularity according to
the usual pronominal declension: thus.
Singular. Dual. Plural,
m. n. f. m. n. i\ m. n. f.
N . EFT srar i n i & snfä ETTĪĪ
yás yát yā́ I - j | % JJ yé yā́ni yā́s
A . E R EFT ETPT í yāú yé yé EIH ETTf-T ETTīī -s yām yát yā́m / yā́n yā́ni yā́s
I. E R ETETT īīīī ETTpTīī
yéna yáyā ETFETR y
à 1 s
yā́bhis
D
– ET^f ĪJÌĪĪ yā́bhyām ERJīī ETRrīī
yásmāi yásyāi yébhyas yā́bhyas
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
a. The Veda shows its usual variations of these forms: yā́ for yāú
and for yā́ni, and yébhis for yāís; yós for yáyos also occurs once;
yénā, with prolonged final, is in RV. twice as common as yéna. Reso-
509—] VII . PRONOUNS. 196
lutioiis occur in yábhias, and yéṣaam and yásaam. The conjunction
yā́t is an ablative form according to the ordinary declension.
510. The use of yát asrepresentative stem begins very early:
we have yátkāma in the Veda, and yatkārín, yaddevatyà in the
Brāhmaṇa; later it grows more general. From the proper root come
also a considerable series of derivatives: yátas, yáti, yátra, yáthā,
yádā, yádi, yárhi, yā́vant, yatará, yatamá; and the compound
yādṛ́ś.
511. The combination of ya with ka to make an indefinite
pronoun has been noticed above (507). Its own repetition — as
yád-yat — gives it sometimes a like meaning, won through the distributive.
512. One or two marked peculiarities in the Sanskrit use of
the relative may be here briefly noticed:
a. A very decided preference for putting the relative clause before
that to which it relates: thus, yáḥ sunvatáḥ sákhā tásmā índrāya
gāyata (RV.) who is the friend of the soma-presser, to that Indra sing ye;
yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási sá id devéṣu gacchati (RV.) what offering
thou protectest, that in truth goeth to the gods; yé triṣaptā́ḥ pariyánti
bálā téṣāṁ dadhātu me (AV.) what thrice seven go about, their strengthmay he assign to me; asāú yó adharā́d gṛhás tátra santv arāyyàḥ
(AV.) what house is yonder in the depth, there let the witches be; sahà yánme ásti téna (TB.) along with that which is mine; haṃsānāṁ vacanaṁ
yat tu tan māṁ dahati (MBh.) but what the words of the swans were,
that burns me; sarvasya locanaṁ śāstraṁ yasya nā 'sty andha eva
sah (H.) who does not possess learning, the eye of everything, blind indeedis he. The other arrangement, though frequent enough, is notably less
usual.
b. A frequent conversion of the subject or object of a verb by an
added relative into a substantive clause: thus, mé 'mám prā́ "pat pāú¬
ruṣeyo vadhó yáḥ (AV.) may there not reach him a human deadly weapon
(litìy, what is such a weapon); pari ṇo pāhi yád dhánam (AV.) protect of us what wealth [there isj; apāmārgó 'pa mārṣṭu kṣetriyáṁ
śapáthaś ca yáḥ (AV.) may the cleansing plant cleanse away the disease
and the curse; puṣkareṇa hṛtaṁ rājyaṁ yac cā 'nyad vasu kiṁcana
(MBh.) by Pushkara was taken away the kingdom and whatever other property[there was].
Other Pronouns: Emphatic, Indefinite.
513. a. The isolated and uninflected pronominal word
svayam (from the root sva) signifies self oivn self.
By its form it appears to be a nom. sing., and it is often-
197 PRONOMINAL DERIVATIVES. [—516
est used as nominative, but along with words of all persons
and numbers; and not seldom it represents other cases also.
b. Svayam is also used as a stem in composition: thus, sva¬
yaṁjā́, svayambhū́. But sva itself (usually adjective: below, 516e)
has the same value in composition; and even its inflected forms are
vin the older language very rarely) used as reflexive pronoun.
c. In RV. alone are found a few examples of two indefinite
pronouns, sama (accentless) any, every, and simá every, all.
Nouns used pronominally.
514. a. The noun ātmán soul is widely employed, in the singular (extremely rarely in other numbers), as reflexive pronoun of all
three persons.
b. The noun tanū́ body is employed in the same manner (but in all
numbers) in the Veda.
c. The adjective bhavant, i. bhavatī, is used (as already
pointed out: 456) in respectful address as substitute for the pronoun
of the second person. Its construction with the verb is in accordance with its true character, as a word of the third person.
Pronominal Derivatives.
515. From pronominal roots and stems, as well as from
the larger class of roots and from noun-stems, are formed
by the ordinary suffixes of adjective derivation certain words
and classes of words, which have thus the character of pronominal adjectives.
Some of the more important of these may be briefly noticed
here.
516. Possessives, a. From the representative stems mad etc.
are formed the adjectives madīya, asmadīya, tvadīya, yuṣmadīya,
tadīya, and etadīya, which are used in a possessive sense: relating
to me, mine, and so on.
b. Other possessives are māmaká (also mámaka, RV.) and
tāvaká, from the genitives máma and táva. And RY. has once
mā́kīna.
c. An analogous derivative from the genitive amúṣya is āmuṣyā¬
yaṇá (AV. etc.) descendant of such and such a one.
d. It was pointed out above (493) that the "genitives" asmā́kam
and yuṣmā́kam are really stereotyped cases of possessive adjectives.
516--] VII . PRONOUNS. 198
e. Corresponding to svayám (513) is the possessive svá, meaning own, as relating to all persons and numbers. The R V . has once
the corresponding simple possessive of the second person, tvá t/*y.
f. For the use of sva as reflexive pronoun, see above, 513 b.
g. All these words form their feminines in ā.
h. Other derivatives of a like value have no claim to be mentioned
here. But (excepting sva) the possessives are so rarely used as to make
but a small figure in the language, which prefers generally to indicate the
possessive relation by the genitive case of the pronoun itself.
517. By the suffix vant are formed from the pronominal roots,
with prolongation of their final vowels, the adjectives mā́vant, tvā́¬
vant, yuṣmā́vant, yuvā́vant, tā́vant, etā́vant, yā́vant, meaning of
my sort, like me, etc. Of these, however, only the last three are in
use in the later language, in the sense of tantus and quantus. They
are inflected like other adjective stems in vant, making their feminines in vatī (452 ff.).
a. Words of similar meaning from the roots i and ki are iyant
and kiyant, inflected in the same manner: see above, 451.
518. The pronominal roots show a like prolongation of vowel
in combination with the root dṛś see, look, and its derivatives -dṛśa
and (quite rarely) dṛkṣa: thus, mādṛś, -dṛśa; tvādṛś, -dṛśa; yuṣ¬
mādṛś, -dṛśa; tādṛ́ś, -dṛ́śa, -dṛkṣa; etādṛ́ś, -dṛ́śa, -dṛ́kṣa; yādṛ́ś,
-dṛ́śa; īdṛ́ś, -dṛ́śa, -dṛ́kṣa; kīdṛ́ś, -dṛśa, -dṛkṣa. They mean of my
sort, like or resembling me, and the like, and tādṛś and the following
are not uncommon, with the sense of talis and qualis. The forms in
dṛś are unvaried for gender; those in dṛśa (and dṛkṣa ?) have feminines in I. »
519. From ta, ka, ya come táti so many, káti how many? yáti
as many. They have a quasi-numeral character, and are inflected
(like the numerals páñea etc.: above, 483) only in the plural, and
with the bare stem as nom. and accus.-. thus, N.A. táti; I. etc.
tátibhis, tátibhyas, tátīnām, tátiṣu.
520. From ya (in V. and B.) and ka come the comparatives
and superlatives yatará and yatamá, and katará and katamá; and
from i9
the comparative itara. For their inflection, see below, 523.
521. Derivatives with the suffix ka, sometimes conveying a
diminutive or a contemptuous meaning, are made from certain of the
pronominal roots and stems (and may, according to the grammarians,
be made from them all):thus, from ta, takám, takát, takā́s; from
sa, sakā́; from ya, yakás, yakā́, yaké; from asāú, asakāú; from
amu, amuka.
a. For the numerous and frequently used adverbs formed from pronominal roots, see Adverbs (below, 1097 ff.).
199 ADJECTIVES DECLINED PRONOMINALLY. [—526
Adjectives declined pronominaily.
522. A number of adjectives — some of them coming
from pronominal roots, others more or less analogous with
pronouns in use — are inflected, in part or wholly, according to the pronominal declension (like ft ta, 495), w
r
ith
feminine stems in ā. Thus:
523. The comparatives and superlatives from pronominal roots
— namely, katará and katamá, yatará and yatamá, and ítara;
also anyá other, and its comparative anyatará — are declined like
ta throughout.
a. But even from these words forms made according to the adjective
declension are sporadically met with (e. g. itarāyām K,).
b. Anya takes occasionally the form anyat in composition: thus,
anyatkāma, anyatsthāna.
524. Other words are so inflected except in the nom.-acc.-voc.
sing, neut., where they have the ordinary adjective form am, instead
of the pronominal at (ad). Such are sárva all, víśva all, every,
éka one.
a. These, also, are not without exception, at least in the earlier
language (e. g. víśvāya, víśvāt, víśve RV.; éke loc. sing., AV.).
525. Yet other words follow the same model usually, or in
some oftheir significations, or optionally; but in other senses, or
without known rule, lapse into the adjective inflection.
a. Such are the comparatives and superlatives from prepositional stems :
ádhar a and adhamá , ántar a and ántama , ápar a and apamá , ávar a
and avamá , úttar a and uttamá , úpar a and upamá . Of these, pronominal forms are decidedly more numerous from the comparatives than from
the superlatives.
b. Further, the superlatives (without corresponding comparatives)
paramá, caramá, madhyamá; and also anyatama (whose positive and
comparative belong to the class first mentioned: 523).
c. Further, the words pára distant, other; pū́rva prior, east; dak¬
ṣiṇa right, south; paścima behind, western; ubháya (f. ubháyī or
ubhayī́) of both kinds or parties; néma the one, half; and the possessi\e
svá.
526. Occasional forms of the pronominal declension are met with from
numeral adjectives: e. g. prathamásyās, tṛtī́yasyām; and from other
words having an indefinite numeral character: thus, álpa few; ardh á
half; kéval a all; dvitaya of the two kinds; bā́hya outside — and others.
RV. has once samānásmāt.
527—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 200
CHAPTE R VIII .
CONJUGATION.
527. T H E subject of conjugation or verbal inflection
involves, as in the other languages of the family, the distinctions of voice, tense, mode, number, and person.
a. Further, besides the simpler or ordinary conjugation
of a verbal root, there are certain more or less fully developed secondary or derivative conjugations.
528. Voice. There are (as in Greek) two voices, active
and middle, distinguished by a difference in the personal
endings. This distinction is a pervading one: there is no
active personal form which does not have its corresponding
middle, and vice versa; and it is extended also in part to
the participles (but not to the infinitive),
529. An active form is called by the Hindu grammarians
parasmāi padam a word for another, and a middle form is called
ātmane padam a word for one's self:the terms might be best paraphrased by transitive and reflexive. And the distinction thus expressed is doubtless the original foundation ofthe difference of active
and middle forms; in the recorded condition of the language, however, the antithesis of transitive and reflexive meaning is in no small
measure blurred, or even altogether effaced.
a. In the epics there is much effacement of the distinction between
active and middle, the choice of voice being very often determined by
metrical considerations alone.
580. Some verbs are conjugated in both voices, others
in one only; sometimes a part of the tenses are inflected
only in one voice, others only in the other or in both; of
a verb usually inflected in one voice sporadic forms of the
other occur; and sometimes the voice differs according as
the verb is compounded with certain prepositions.
201 TENS E A N D MODE . [—533
531. The middle forms outside the present-system (for
which there is a special passive inflection: see below, 768 ff.),
and sometimes also within that system, are liable to be
used likewise in a passive sense.
532. Tense. The tenses are as follows: 1. a present,
with 2. an imperfect, closely related with it in form, having
a prefixed augment; 3. a perfect, made with reduplication
to which in the Veda is added, 4. a so-called pluperfect,
made from it with prefixed augment); 5. an aorist, of three
different formations: a. simple; b. reduplicated; e. sigmatic
or sibilant; 6. a future, with 7. a conditional, an augmenttense, standing to it in the relation of an imperfect to a
present; and 8. a second, a periphrastic, future (not found
in the Veda).
a. The tenses here distinguished (in accordance with prevailing
usage) as imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, and aorist receive those
names from their correspondence in mode of formation with tenses
so called in other languages of the family, especially in Greek, and
not at all from differences of time designated by them. In no period
of the Sanskrit language is there any expression of imperfect or
pluperfect time — nor of perfect time, except in the older language,
where the "aorist" has this value; later, imperfect, perfect, and aorist
are so many undiscriminated past tenses or preterits: see below,
under the different tenses.
533. Mode. In respect to mode, the difference between the classical Sanskrit and the older language of the
Veda — and, in a less degree, of the Brāhmaṇas — is
especially great.
a. In the Veda, the present tense has, besides its indicative
inflection, a subjunctive, of considerable variety of formation, an
optative, and an imperative (in 2d and 3d persons). The same three
modes are found, though of much less frequent occurrence, as belonging to the perfect; and they are made also from the aorists,
being of especial frequency from the simple aorist. The future has
no modes (an occasional case or two are purely exceptional).
b. In the classical Sanskrit, the present adds to its indicative an optative and an imperative — of which last.
533—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 2 0 2
moreover, the first persons are a remnant of the old subjunctive. And the aorist has also an optative, of somewhat
peculiar inflection, usually called the precative (or bene¬
dictive).
534. The present, perfect, and future tenses have each
of them, alike in the earlier and later language, a pair of
participles, active and middle, sharing in the various peculiarities of the tense-formations; and in the Veda are
found such participles belonging also to the aorist.
535. Tense-systems. The tenses, then, with their
accompanying modes and participles, fall into certain wellmarked groups or systems:
I. The present-system, composed of the present tense with its modes, its participle, and its preterit which we have called the imperfect.
II. The perfect-system, composed of the perfect tense (with, in the Veda, its modes and its preterit,
the so-called pluperfect) and its participle.
III. The aorist-system, or systems, simple, reduplicated, and sibilant, composed of the aorist tense
along with, in the later language, its "precative" optative (but, in the Veda, with its various modes and its
participle).
IV. The future-systems: 1. the old or sibilant
future, with its accompanying preterit, the conditional,
and its participle; and 2. the new periphrastic future.
536. Numbe r and Person. The verb has, of course,
the same three numbers with the noun: namely, singular,
dual, and plural; and in each number it has the three persons, first, second, and third. All of these are made in
every tense and mode — except that the first persons of
the imperative numbers are supplied from the subjunctive.
2 0 3 VERBAL ADJECTIVES AND NOUNS. [—540
537. Verba l adjectives and nouns: Participles.
The participles belonging to the tense-systems have been
already spoken of above (534). There is besides, coming
directly from the root of the verb, a participle, prevailingly
of past and passive (or sometimes neuter) meaning. Future
passive participles, or gerundives, of several different formations, are also made.
538. Infinitives. In the older language, a very considerable variety of derivative abstract nouns — only in a
few sporadic instances having anything to do with the tensesystems — are used in an infinitive or quasi-infinitive
sense; most often in the dative case, but sometimes also in
the accusative, in the genitive and ablative, and (very rarely)
in the locative. In the classical Sanskrit, there remains a
single infinitive, of accusative case-form, having nothing
to do with the tense-systems.
539. Gerunds. A so-called gerund (or absolutive) —
being, like the infinitive, a stereotyped case-form of a derivative noun — is a part of the general verb-system in
both the earlier and later language, being especially frequent in the later language, where it has only two forms,
one for simple verbs, and the other for compound. Its value
is that of an indeclinable active participle, of indeterminate
but prevailingly past tense-character.
a. Another gerund, an adverbially used accusative in form, is
found, but only rarely, both earlier and later.
540. Secondary conjugations. The secondary or
derivative conjugations are as follows: 1. the passive; 2. the
intensive; 3. the desiderative; 4. the causative. In these,
a conjugation-stem, instead of the simple root, underlies
the whole system of inflection. Yet there is clearly to be
seen in them the character of a present-system, expanded
into a more or less complete conjugation; and the passive is
540—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 204
so purely a present-system that it will be described in the
chapter devoted to that part of the inflection of the verb.
a. Under the same general head belongs the subject of
denominative conjugation, or the conversion of noun and
adjective-stems into conjugation-stems. Further, that of
compound conjugation, whether by the prefixion of prepositions to roots or by the addition of auxiliary verbs to noun
and adjective-stems. And finally, that of periphrastic conjugation, or the looser combination of auxiliaries with verbal
nouns and adjectives.
541. The characteristic of a proper (finite or personal)
verb-form is its personal ending. By this alone is determined its character as regards number and person — and
in part also as regards mode and tense. But the distinctions of mode and tense are mainly made by the formation
of tense and mode-stems, to which, rather than to the pure
root, the personal endings are appended.
a. In this chapter will be given a general account of the personal endings, and also of the formation of mode-stems from tensestems, and of those elements in the formation of tense-stems — the
augment and the reduplication — which are found in more than one
tense-system. Then, :in the following chapters, each tense-system
will be taken up by itself, and the methods of formation of its stems,
both tense-stems and mode-stems, and their combination with the
endings, will be described and illustrated in detail. And the complete conjugation of a few model verbs will be exhibited in systematic arrangement in Appendix C.
Personal Endings.
542. The endings of verbal inflection are, as was pointed out
above, different throughout in the active and middle voices. They
are also, as in Greek, usually of two somewhat varying forms for
the same person in the same voice: one fuller, called primary; the
ther briefer, called secondary. There are also less pervading differences, depending upon other conditions.
a. In the epics, exchanges of primary and secondary active endings
eespecially the substitution of ma, va, ta, for mas, vas, tha) are not
infrequent.
205 PERSONA L ENDINGS . [—545
b. A condensed statement of all the varieties of ending for each person and number here follows.
543. Singular: First person, a. The primary ending in
the active is mi. The subjunctive, however (later imperative), has
ni instead; and in the oldest Veda this ni is sometimes wanting,
and the person ends in ā (as if the ni of āni were dropped). The
secondary ending is properly m; but to this m an a has come to
be so persistently prefixed, appearing regularly where the tense-stem
does not itself end in a (vam for varm or varam in RV., once, and
abhūm MS., avadhīm TS. etc., sanem TB., are rare anomalies), that
it is convenient to reckon am as ending, rather than m. But the perfect tense has neither mi nor m; its ending is simply a (sometimes
ā: 248 c) ; or, from ā-roots‚ āu.
b. The primary middle ending, according to the analogy of the
other persons, would be regularly me. But no tense or mode, at
any period of the language, shows any relic whatever of a m in this
person; the primary ending, present as well as perfect, from a-stems
and others alike, is e; and to it corresponds i as secondary ending,
which blends with the final of an a-stem to e. The optative has,
however, a instead of i; and in the subjunctive (later imperative)
appears āi for e.
544. Second person, a. In the active, the primary ending
is si, which is shortened to s as secondary; as to the loss of this
s after a final radical consonant, see below, 555. But the perfect
and the imperative desert here entirely the analogy of the other
forms. The perfect ending is invariably tha (or thā: 248 c). The
imperative is far less regular. The fullest form of its ending is dhi;
which, however, is more often reduced to hi; and in the great majority of verbs (including all a-stems, at every period of the language) no ending is present, but the bare stem stands as personal
form. In a very small class of verbs (722—3), āna is the ending.
There is also an alternative ending tat; and this is even used sporadically in other persons of the imperative (see below, 570—1).
b. In the middle voice, the primary ending, both present and
perfect, is se. The secondary stands in no apparent relation to this,
being thās; and in the imperative isfound only sva (or svā: 248 c),
which in the Veda is not seldom to be read as sua. In the older
language, se is sometimes strengthened to sāi in the subjunctive.
545. Third person, a. The active primary ending is ti; the
secondary, t; as to the loss of the latter after a final radical consonant, see below, 555. But in the imperative appears instead the
peculiar ending tu; and in the perfect no characteristic consonant is
present, and the third person has the same ending as the first.
b. The primary middle ending is te, with ta as corresponding
secondary. In the older language, te is often strengthened to tāiin
545--] VIII. CONJUGATION. 206
the subjunctive. In the perfect, the middle third person has, like
the active, the same ending with the first, namely e simply; and in
the older language, the third person present also often loses the distinctive part of its termination, and comes to coincide in form with
the first (and MS. has aduha for adugdha). To this e perhaps corresponds, as secondary, the i of the aorist 3d pers. passive (842 ff.).
The imperative has tām (or, in the Veda, rarely ām) for its ending.
546. Dual: First person. Both in active and in middle,
the dual first person is in all its varieties precisely like the corresponding plural, only with substitution of v for the m of the latter:
thus, vas (no vasi has been found to occur), va, vahe, vahi, vahāi.
The person is, of course, of comparatively rare use, and from the
Veda no form in vas, even, is quotable.
547. Second and Thir d persons, a. In the active, the
primary ending of the second person is thas, and that of the third
is tas; and this relation of th to t appears also in the perfect, and
runs through the whole series of middle endings. The perfect endings
are primary, but have u instead of a as vowel; and an a has become
so persistently prefixed that their forms have to be reckoned as athus
and atus. The secondary endings exhibit no definable relation to
the primary in these two persons; they are tam and tām; and they
are used in the imperative as well.
b. In the middle, a long ā — which, however, with the final
a of a-stems becomes e — has become prefixed to all dual endings
of the second and third persons, so as to form an inseparable part
of them (dīdhīthām AV., and jihīthām ŚB„ are isolated anomalies).
The primary endings, present and perfect, are āthe and āte; the
secondary (and imperative) are āthām and ātām (or, with stem-final
a, ethe etc.).
c. The Rig-Veda has a very few forms in āithe and āite, apparently
from ethe and ete with subjunctive strengthening (they are all detailed
below: see 615, 701, 737, 752, 836, 1008, 1043),
548. Plural: First person, a. The earliest form of the
active ending is masi, which in the oldest language is more frequent
than the briefer mas (in RV., as five to one; in AV., however, only
as three to four). In the classical Sanskrit, mas is the exclusive
primary ending; but the secondary abbreviated ma belongs also to
the perfect and the subjunctive (imperative). In the Veda, ma often
becomes mā (248 c), especially in the perfect.
b. The primary middle ending is mahe. This is lightened in
the secondary form to mahi; and, on the other hand, it is regularly (in the Veda, not invariably) strengthened to mahāi in the subjunctive (imperative).
549. Second person, a. The active primary ending is tha.
The secondary, also imperative, ending is ta (in the Veda, tā only
207 PERSONA L ENDINGS . [—550
once in impv.). But in the perfect any characteristic consonant is
wanting, and the ending is simply a. In the Veda, the syllable na,
of problematic origin, is not infrequently added to both forms of the
ending, making thana (rarely thanā) and tana. The forms in which
this occurs will be detailed below, under the different formations; the
addition is very rarely made excepting to persons of the first general
conjugation.
b. The middle primary ending is dhve, which belongs to the
perfect as well as the present. In the subjunctive of the older language it is sometimes strengthened to dhvāi. The secondary (and
imperative) ending is dhvam (in RV., once dhva); and dhvāt is
once met with in the imperative (570). In the Veda, the v of all
these endings is sometimes to be resolved into u, and the ending
becomes dissyllabic. As to the change of dh of these endings to
ḍh, see above, 226 c.
550. Third person, a. The full primary ending is anti in
the active, with ante as corresponding middle. The middle secondary ending is anta, to which should correspond an active ant; but
of the t only altogether questionable traces are left, in the euphonic
treatment of a final n (207); the ending is an. In the imperative,
antu and antām take the place of anti and ante. The initial a of
all these endings is like that of am in the 1st sing., disappearing
after the final a of a tense-stem.
b. Moreover, anti, antu, ante, antām, anta are all liable to
be weakened by the loss of their nasal, becoming ati etc. In the
active, this weakening takes place only after reduplicated non-a-stems
and after a few roots which are treated as if reduplicated: 639 ff.);
in the middle, it occurs after all tense-stems save those ending in a.
c. Further, for the secondary active ending an there is a substitute us (or ur: 169b; the evidence of the Zend favors the
latter form), which is used in the same reduplicating verbs that
change anti to ati etc., and which accordingly appears as a weaker
correlative of an. The same us is also used universally in the perfect, in the optative (not in the subjunctive), in those forms of the
aorist whose stem does not end in a, and in the imperfect of rootstems ending in ā, and a few others (621).
d. The perfect middle has in all periods of the language the
peculiar ending re, and the optative has the allied ran, in this person. In the Veda, a variety of other endings containing a r as distinctive consonant are met with: namely, re (and ire) and rate in
the present; rata in the optative (both of present and of aorist1
;
rire in the perfect; ranta, ran, and ram in aorists (and in an imperfect or two); rām and ratām in the imperative; ra in the imperfect of duh (MS.). The three rate, ratām, and rata are found even
in the later language in one or two verbs (629).
551-] VIII. CONJUGATION. 2 0 8
551. Below are given, for convenience, in tabular form, the
schemes of endings as accepted in the classical or later language:
namely, a. the regular primary endings, used in the present indicative and the future (and the subjunctive in part); and b. the regular secondary endings, used in the imperfect, the conditional, the
aorist, the optative (and the subjunctive in part); and further, of
special schemes, c the perfect endings (chiefly primary, especially in
the middle); and d. the imperative endings (chiefly secondary). To
the so-called imperative endings of the first person is prefixed the ā
which is practically a part of them, though really containing the
mode-sign of the subjunctive from which they are derived.
552. Further, a part of the endings are marked with an accent,
and a part are left unaccented. The latter are those which never,
under any circumstances, receive the accent; the formerare accented
in considerable classes of verbs, though by no means in all. It will
be noticed that, in general, the unaccented endings are those of the
singular active; but the 2d sing, imkerative has an accented ending;
and, on the other hand, the whole series of 1st persons imperative,
active and middle, have unaccented endings (this being a characteristic
of the subjunctive formation which they represent).
553. The schemes of normal endings, then, are as follows:
a. Primary Endings.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 mi vás más é váhe máhe
2 si thás thá sé ā́the dhvé
;Ì ti tás ánti, áti té ā́te ánte, áte
b. Secondary Endings.
1 am vá má í, á váhi máhi
2 s tám tá thā́s ā́thām dhvám
3 t tā́m an, ús tá ā́tām ánta, áta, rán
c. Perfect Endings.
1 a vá má é váhe máhe
2 tha áthus á sé ā́the dhvé
3 a átus ús é ā́te ré
d. Imperative Endings.
1 āni āva āma āi āvahāi āmahāi
2 dhí, hí, — tám tá svá ā́thām dhvám
3 tu tā́m ántu, átu tā́m ā́tām ántām, átām
554. In general, the rule is followed that an accented ending, if dissyllabic, is accented on its first syllable — and the constant union-vowels
are regarded, in this respect, as integral parts of the endings. But the
209 PERSONA L ENDINGS . [—557
3d pi. ending ate of the pres. indie, middle has in RV. the accent até in
a number of verbs (see 613, 685, 699, 719); and an occasional instance
is met with in other endings: thus, mahé (see 719, 735).
555. The secondary endings of the second and third persons singular,
as consisting of an added consonant without vowel, should regularly (150)
be lost whenever the root or stem to which they are to be added itself ends
in a consonant. And this rule is in general followed; yet not without exceptions. Thus:
a. A root ending in a dental mute sometimes drops this final mute
instead of the added s in the second person; and, on the other hand, a root
or stem ending in s sometimes drops this s instead of the added t in the
third person — in either case, establishing the ordinary relation of s and t
in these persons, instead of B and s‚ or t and t. The examples noted are:
2d sing, aves (to 3d sing, avet), √vid, AB.; 3d sing, akat, √kṛ, ŚB.
aghat, √ghas, JB. AŚS.; acakāt, √cakās, RT.; aśāt, √śās, AB. MBh.
R.; asrat, √sras, VS.; ahinat, √hiṃs, ŚB. TB. GB. Compare also the
s-aorist forms ayās and srās (146 a), in which the same influence is to
be seen; and further, ajāit etc. (889a), and precative yāt for yās
(837). A similar loss of any other final consonant is excessively rare;
AV. has once abhanas, for -nak, √bhañj. There are also a few cases
where a 1st sing, is irregularly modeled after a 3d sing.: thus, atṛṇam
(to atṛṇat), √tṛd, KU., acchinam (to acchinat), √chid, MBh.: compare
urther the 1st sing, in m instead of am, 543 a.
b. Again, a union-vowel is sometimes introduced before the ending,
either a or i or ī: see below, 621b, 631, 819, 880, 1004a, 1068a.
o. In a few isolated cases in the older language, this ī is changed
to āi: see below, 904 b, 936, 1068 a.
556. The changes of form which roots and stems undergo in
their combinations with these endings will be pointed out in detail
below, under the various formations. Here may be simply mentioned
in advance, as by far the most important among them, a distinction
of stronger and weaker form of stem in large classes of verbs, standing in relation with the accent — the stem being of stronger form
when the accent falls upon it, or before an accentless ending, and of
weaker form when the accent is on the ending.
a. Of the endings marked as accented in the scheme, the ta of 2d
pi. is not infrequently in the Veda treated as unaccented, the tone resting
on the stem, which is strengthened. Much less often, the tam of 2d du.
is treated in the same way; other endings, only sporadically. Details are
given under the various formations below.
Subjunctive Mode.
557. Of the subjunctive mode (as was pointed out above) only
fragments are left in the later or classical language: namely, in the
557--] VIII. CONJUGATION . 210
so-called first persons imperative, and in the use 579, of the imperfect and aorist persons without augment after ma prohibitive. In
the oldest period, however, it was a very frequent formation, being
three or four times as common as the optative in the Rig-Veda, and
nearly the same in the Atharvan; but already in the Brāhmaṇas it
becomes comparatively rare. Its varieties of form are considerable,
and sometimes perplexing.
558. In its normal and regular formation, a special mode-stem
is made for the subjunctive by adding to the tense-stem an a —
which combines with a final a of the tense-stem to ā. The accent
rests upon the tense-stem, which accordingly has the strong form.
Thus, from the strong present-stem doh (√duh) is made the subjunctive-stem dóha; from juhó (√hu), juháva; from yunáj (^yuj),
yunája; from sunó f√su ‚sunáva; from bháva (√bhū), bhávā; from
tudá (√tud), tudā́; from ucyá (pass., √vac/9 ucyā́; and so on.
559. The stem thus formed is inflected in general as an a-stem
would be inflected in the indicative, with constant accent, and ā for
a before the endings of the first person (733 i. — but with the
following peculiarities as to ending etc.:
560. a. In the active, the 1st sing, has ni as ending: thus, dóhāni,
yunájām, bhávāni. But in the Rig-Veda sometimes ā simply: thus,
áyā, brávā.
b. In 1st du., 1st pi., and 3d pi., the endings are the secondary:
thus, dóhāva, dóhāma, dóhan; bhávāva, bhávāma, bhávān.
c In 2d and 3d du. and 2d pi., the endings are primary: thus,
dóhathas, dóhatas, dóhatha; bhávāthas, bhávātas, bhávātha.
d. In 2d and 3d sing., the endings are either primary or secondary :
thus, dóhasi or dóhas, dóhati or dóhat; bhávāsi or bhávās, bhávāti
or bhávāt.
e. Occasionally, forms with double mode-sign ā (by assimilation to
the more numerous subjunctives from tense-stems in a) are met with from
non-a-stems: thus, ásātha from as; áyās, áyāt, áyān from e (√i).
561. In the middle , forms with secondary instead of primary endings are very rare, being found only in the 3d pi. (where they are more
frequent than the primary), and in a case or two of the 3d sing, (and
AB. has once asyāthās).
a. The striking peculiarity of subjunctive middle inflection is the frequent strengthening of e to āi in the endings. This ib less general in the
very earliest language than later. In 1st sing., āi alone is found as ending, even in RV. ; and in 1st du. also (of rare occurrence), only āvahāi
is met with. In 1st pi., āmahāi prevails in RV. and AV. (āmahe is
found a few times), and is alone known later. In 2d sing., sāi for se
does not occur in RV., but is the only form in AV. and the Brāhmaṇas.
In 3d sing., tāi for te occurs once in RV., and is the predominant form
211 SUBJUNCTIV E MODE . [—565
in AV., and the only one later. In 2d pi., dhvāi for dhve is found in
one word in RV., and a few times in the Brāhmaṇas. In 3d pi., ntāi
for nte is the Brālimaṇa form (of far from frequent occurrence); it occurs
neither in RV. nor AV. No such dual endings as thai and tāi, for the
and te, are anywhere found; but RV. has in a few words (nine: above,
547 c) āithe and āite, which appear to be a like subjunctive strengthening
of ethe and ete (although found in one indicative form, kṛṇvāite). Be¬
fore the āi-endings, the vowel is regularly long ā; but antāi instead of
āntāi is two or three times met with, and once or twice (TS. AB.) atāi
for ātāi.
562. The subjunctive endings, then, in combination with the
subjunctive mode-sign, are as follows:
active.. middle.
s. d. p.
āni āva āma
a s i
athas atha
as
ati
atas an
at
d.
āvahā
āvahe
āithe
āite
Pāmahāi
āmahe
adhve
ādhvāi
ante, anta
āntāi
a. And in further combination with final a of a tense-stem, the
initial a of all these endings becomes ā: thus, for example, in 2d pers.,
āsi or ās, āthas, ātha, āse, ādhve.
563. Besides this proper subjunctive, with mode-sign, in its triple
form — with primary, with strengthened primary, and with secondary endings — the name of subjunctive, in the forms "imperfect subjunctive" and
"improper subjunctive", has been also given to the indicative forms of imperfect and aorist when used, with the augment omitted, in a modal sense
(below, 537): such use being quite common in RV., but rapidly dying out,
so that in the Brāhmaṇa language and later it is hardly met with except
after mā prohibitive.
a. As to the general uses of the subjunctive, see below, 574 ff.
Optative Mode.
564. a. As has been already pointed out, the optative is of comparatively rare occurrence in the language of the Vedas; but it gains
rapidly in frequency, and already in the Brāhmaṇas greatly outnumbers the subjunctive, and still later comes almost entirely to
take its place.
b. Its mode of formation is the same in all periods of the
language.
565. a. The optative mode-sign is in the active voice a different one, according as it is added to a tense-stem ending in a‚ or
l
2
3
s.
āi
ase
āsāi
ate
ātāi
565-] VIII. CONJUGATION. 212
to one ending in some other final. In the latter case, it is yā́‚ accented;
this yä is appended to the weaker form of the tense-stem, and takes
the regular series of secondary endings, with, in 3d plur., us instead of an, and loss of the ā before it. After an a-stem, it is I,
unaccented; this ī blends with the final a to e (which then is accented
or not according to the accent of the a); and the e is maintained
unchanged before a vowel-ending (am, us), by means of an interposed euphonic y.
b. In the middle voice, the mode-sign is ī throughout, and takes
the secondary endings, with a in 1stsing., and ran in 3d pi. After
an a-stem, the rules as to its combination to e, the accent of the
latter, and its retention before a vowel-ending with interposition of
a y, are the same as in the active. After any other final, the weaker
form of stem is taken, and the accent is on the ending (except in
one class of verbs, where it falls upon the tense-stem: see 645); and
the ī (as when combined to e) takes an inserted y before the vowelendings (a, āthām, ātam).
c. It is, of course, impossible to tell from the form whether i or ï
is combined with the final of an a-stem to e; but no good reason appears
to exist for assuming i, rather than the ī which shows itself in the other
class of stems in the middle voice.
586. The combined mode-sign and endings of the optative,,
then, are as follows, in their double form, for a-stems and for others:
a. for non-a-stems.
active. middle.
s. d.
1 yā́m yā́va
2 yā́s yā́tam
3 yā́t yā́tām
p. s.
yā́ma īyá
yā́ta ïthā́s
yús ītá
d. p.
īváhi īmáhi
ïyā́thām ïdhvám
īyā́tām īrán
b. combined with the final of a-stems.
1 eyam eva ema eya evahi emahi
2 es etam eta ethās eyāthām edhvam
3 et etām eyus eta eyātām eran
c. The yä is in the Veda not seldom resolved into iä.
d. The contracted sonem, for saneyam, is found in TB. and Āpast.
Certain Vedic 3d pi. middle forms in rata will be mentioned below, under
the various formations.
567. Precative. Precative forms are such as have a sibilant inserted between the optative-sign and the ending. They are
made almost only from the aorist stems, and, though allowed by the
grammarians to be formed from every root — the active precative
from the simple aorist, the middle from the sibilant aorist — are
213 OPTATIV E MODE . [—570
practically of rare occurrence at every period of the language, and
especially later.
a. The inserted s runs in the active through the whole series of persons; in the middle, it is allowed only in the 2d and 3d persons sing, and
du. and the 2d pi., and is quotable only for the 2d and 3d sing. In
the 2d sing, act., the precative form, by reason of the necessary loss of the
added s, is not distinguishable from the simple optative; in the 3d sing,
act., the same is the case in the later language, which (compare 555 a) saves
the personal ending t instead of the precative-sign s; but the RV. usually,
and the other Vedic texts to some extent, have the proper ending yās (for
yāst). As to ḍh in the 2d pi. mid., see 226 c.
b. The accent is as in the simple optative.
568. The precative endings, then, accepted in the later language
(including, in brackets, those which are identical with the simple
optative), are as follows:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 yā́sam yā́sva yā́sma [īyá] [īváhi] [īmáhi]
2 [yā́s] yā́stam yā́sta īṣṭhā́s īyā́sthām īḍhvam 3
[yā́t] yā́stām yā́sus īṣṭá īyā́stām [īrán]
a. Respecting the precative, see further 921 ff.
b. As to the general uses of the optative, see below, 573 ff.
Imperative Mode.
569. The imperative has no mode-sign; it is made by
adding its own endings directly to the tense-stem, just as
the other endings are added to form the indicative tenses.
a. Hence, in 2d and 3d du. and 2d pi., its forms aTe indistinguishable
from those of the augment-preterit from the same stem with its augment
omitted.
b. The rules as to the use of the different endings — especially in
2d sing., where the variety is considerable — will be given below, in connection with the various tense-systems. The ending tat, however, has so much
that is peculiar in its use that it calls for a little explanation here.
570. The Imperative in tat. An imperative form, usually
having the value of a 2d pers. sing., but sometimes also of other persons and numbers, is made by adding tat to a present tense-stem —
in its weak form, if it have a distinction of strong and weak form.
a. Examples are: brūtāt, hatāt, vittā́t; pipṛtāt, jahītāt,
dhattā́t; kṛṇutāt, kurutāt; gṛhṇītāt, jānītā́t; ávatāt, rákṣatāt,
vasatāt; viśatāt, sṛjatāt; asyatāt, naśyatāt, chyatāt; kriyatāt;
570—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 214
gamayatāt, cyāvayatāt, vārayatāt; īpsatāt; jāgṛtāt. No examples
have been found from a nasal-class verb (690), nor any other than those
here given from a passive, intensive, or desiderative. The few accented cases
indicate that the formation follows the general rule for one made with an
accented ending (552),
b. The imperative in tat is not a very rare formation in the older
language, being made (in V., B., and S.) from about fifty roots, and
in toward a hundred and fifty occurrences. Later, it is very unusual: thus,
only a single example has been noted in MBh‚, and one in R.; and correspondingly few in yet more modern texts.
571. Asregards its meaning, this form appears to have prevailingly in the Brāhmaṇas, and traceably but much less distinctly
in the Vedic texts, a specific tense-value added to its mode-value —
as signifying, namely, an injunction to be carried out at a later time
than the present: it is (like the Latin forms in to and tote) a posterior or future imperative.
a. Examples are: ihāì 'vá mā tíṣṭhantam abhyéhī́ 'ti brūhi
tā́ṁ tu na ā́gatām pratiprábrūtāt (ŚB.) say to her "come to me as I
stand just here" and [afterward] announce her to us as having come; yád
ūrdhvás tíṣṭhā dráviṇe 'há dhattāt (RV.) when thou shalt stand upright, [then] bestow riches here (and similarly in many cases); utkū́lam
udvahó bhavo 'dúhya práti dhāvatāt (AV.) be a carrier up the ascent;
after having carried up, run back again; vánaspátir ádhi tvā sthāsyati
tásya vittāt (TS.) the tree will ascend thee, [then] take note of it.
b. Examples of its use as other than 2d sing, are as follows: 1st
sing., āvyuṣáṁ jāgṛtād ahám (AV.; only case) let me watch till daybreak; as 3d sing., púnar mā́“ viśatād rayíḥ (TS.) let wealth come
again to me, ayáṁ tyásya rā́jā mūrdhā́naṁ ví pātayatāt (ŚB.) the
king here shall make his headflyoff; as 2d du., nā́satyāv abruvan devā́h
púnar ā́ vahatād íti (RV.) the gods said to the two Aśvins "bring them
back again"; as 2d pi., ā́paḥ . . . devéṣu nah sukṛ́to brūtāt (TS.)
ye waters, announce us to the gods as well-doers. In the later language,
the prevailing value appears to be that of a 3d sing.: thus, bhavān prasā¬
daṁ kurutāt (MBh.) may your worship do the favor, enam bhavān
abhirakṣatāt (DKC.) let your excellency protect him.
c. According to the native grammarians, the imperative in tat is to
be used with a benedictive implication. No instance of such use appears
to be quotable.
d. In a certain passage repeated several times in different Brāhmaṇas
and Sūtras, and containing a number of forms in tat used as 2d pi.,
vārayadhvāt is read instead of vārayatāt in some of the texts (K. AB.
AŚS. ŚŚS.). No other occurrence of the ending dhvāt has been anywhere
noted.
215 USE S OF T H E MODES . [—573
Uses of the Modes.
572. Of the three modes, the imperative is the one
most distinct and limited in office, and most unchanged in
use throughout the whole history of the language. It signifies a command or injunction — an attempt at the exercise
of the speaker's will upon some one or something outside
of himself.
a. This, however (in Sanskrit as in other languages), is by no
means always of the same force; the command shades off into a
demand, an exhortation, an entreaty, an expression of earnest desire.
The imperative also sometimes signifies an assumption or concession,
and occasionally, by pregnant construction, it becomes the expression
of something conditional or contingent; but it does not acquire any
regular use in dependent-clause-making.
b. The imperativeis now and then used in an interrogative sentence:
thus, bravīhi ko 'dyāi 'va mayā viyujyatām (ß.*) speak/ who shall
now le separated by me? katham ete guṇavantaḥ kriyantām (H.)
how are they to be made virtuous? kasmāi piṇḍaḥ pradīyatām (Vet.)
to whom shall the offering be given?
573. The optative appears to have as its primary office
the expression of wish or desire; in the oldest language,
its prevailing use in independent clauses is that to which
the name "optative" properly belongs.
a. But the expression of desire, on the one hand, passes naturally over into that of request or entreaty, so that the optative
becomes a softened imperative; and, on the other hand, it comes to
signify what is generally desirable or proper, what should or ought
to be, and so becomes the mode of prescription; or, yet again, it is
weakened into signifying what may or can be, what is likely or
usual, and so becomes at last a softened statement of whatis.
b. Further, the optative in dependent clauses, with relative
pronouns and conjunctions, becomes a regular means of expression
of the conditional and contingent, in a wide and increasing variety
of uses.
c. The so-called precative forms (567) are ordinarily used in the
proper optative sense. But in the later language they are occasionally met
with in the other uses of the optative: thus, na hi prapaśyāmi mama
'panudyād yac chokam (Bh G.) for I do not perceive what should dispel
my grief; yad bhūyasur vibhūtayaḥ (BhP.) that there should be changes.
Also rarely with mā: see 579 b.
574—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 216
574. The subjunctive, as has been pointed out, becomes nearly extinct at an early period in the history of the
language; there are left of it in classical usage only two
relics: the use of its first persons in an imperative sense,
or to signify a necessity or obligation resting on the speaker, or a peremptory intention on his part; and the use of
unaugmented forms (579), with the negative particle *JT mā́,
in a prohibitive or negative imperative sense.
a. And the general value of the subjunctive from the beginning was what these relics would seem to indicate: its fundamental
meaning is perhaps that of requisition, less peremptory than the imperative, more so than the optative. But this meaning is liable to
the same modifications and transitions with that of the optative; and
subjunctive and optative run closely parallel with one another in the
oldest language in their use in independent clauses, and are hardly
distinguishable in dependent. And instead of their being (as in
Greek) both maintained in use, and endowed with nicer and more
distinctive values, the subjunctive gradually disappears, and the
optative assumes alone the offices formerly shared by both.
575. The difference, then, between imperative and subjunctive and optative, in their fundamental and most characteristic uses, is one of degree: command, requisition, wish;
and no sharp line of division exists between them; they
are more or less exchangeable with one another, and com¬
binable in coordinate clauses.
a. Thus, in AV., we have in impv.: śatáṁ jīva śarádaḥ do
thou live a hundred autumns; ubhāú tāú jīvatāṁ jarádaṣṭī let them
both live to attain old age; — in subj., adyá jīvāni let me live this
day; śatáṁ jīvāti śarádaḥ he shall live a hundred autumns; — in
opt., jī́vema śarádāṁ śatā́ni may we live hundreds of autumns; sárvam
ā́yur jīvyāsam (prec.) I would fain live out my whole term of life.
Here the modes would be interchangeable with a hardly perceptible
change of meaning.
b. Examples, again, of different modes in coordinate construction are : iyám agne nā́rī pátiṁ videṣṭa . . . súvānā putrā́n máhiṣī
bhavāti gatvā́ pátiṁ subhágā ví rājatu (AV.) may this woman,
O Agni! find a spouse; giving birth to sons she shall become a chief¬
tainess; having attained a spouse let her rule in happiness; gopāyá
nah svastáye prabúdhe naḥ púnar dadaḥ (TS.) watch over us for
217 USE S OF T H E MODES . [—579
our welfare; grant unto us to wake again; syā́n nah sūnúḥ . . sā́ te
sumatír bhūtv asmé (RV.) may there be to us a son; let thatfavor of
thine be ours. It is not very seldom the case that versions of the
same passage in different texts show different modes as various
readings.
c. There is, in fact, nothing in the earliest employment of these
modes to prove that they might not all be specialized uses of forms
originally equivalent — having, for instance, a general future meaning.
576. As examples of the less characteristic use of subjunctive
and optative in the older language, in independent clauses, may be
quoted the following: ā́ ghā tā́ gacchān úttarā yugā́ni (RV.) those
later ages will doubtless come; yád . .. ná marā íti mányase (RV.)
if thou thinkest "I shall not die"; ná tā́ naśanti ná dabhāti táskaroh
(RV.) they do not become lost; no thief can harm them; kásmāi devā́ya
havíṣā vidhema (RV.) to what god shall we offer oblation f agnínā rayím
aśnavat . . . divé-dive (RV.) by Agni one may gain wealth every day;
utāí 'nām brahmáṇe dadyāt táthā syonā́ śivā́ syāt (AV.) one
should give her, however, to a Brahman; in that case she will be propitious
and favorable; áhar-ahar dadyāt (ŚB.) one should give every day.
577.'The uses of the optative in the later language are of the
utmost variety, covering the whole field occupied jointly by the two
modes in earlier time. A few examples from a single text (MBh.)
will be enough to illustrate them: ucchiṣṭaṁ nāi 'va bhuñjīyāṁ na
kuryām pādadhāvanam I will not eat of the remnant of the sacrifice,
I will not perform the foot-lavation; jñātīn vrajet let her go to her relatives; nāi 'vaṁ sā karhioit kuryāt she should not act thus at any
time; kathaṁ vidyāṁ nalaṁ nṛpam how can I know king Nala?
utsarge saṁśayaḥ syāt tu vindetā 'pi sukhaṁ kvacit but in case
of her abandonment there may be a chance; she may also find happiness
somewhere; kathaṁ vāso vikarteyaṁ na ca budhyeta me priyā
how can 1 cut off the garment and my beloved not wake ?
578. The later use of the first persons subjunctive as so-called
imperative involves no change of construction from former time, but
only restriction to a single kind of use: thus, dīvyāva let us two
play; kiṁ karavāṇi te what shall I do for thee f
579. The imperative negative, or prohibitive, is from the earliest
period of the language regularly and usually expressed by the particle
mā́ with an augmentless past form, prevailingly aorist.
a. Thus, prá pata mé 'há raṁsthāḥ (AV.) fly away, do not stay
here; dviṣáṃś ca máhyaṁ radhyatu ma cā 'háṁ dviṣaté radham
(AV.) both let my foe be subject to me, and let me not be subject to my foe;
urv àśyām ábhayaṁ jyótir indra mā́ no dīrghā́ abhí naśon
tami8rā́ḥ (RV.) I would win broad fearless light, 0 Indra; let not the
long darknesses come upon us; mā́ na ā́yuḥ prá moṣīḥ (RV.) do not
579—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 218
steal away our life; samāśvasihi mā śucaḥ (MBh.) be comforted; do
not grieve; mā bhāiṣīḥ or bhāih (MBh. R.) do not be afraid; mā bhūt
kālasya paryayaḥ (R,) let not a change of time takeplace. Examples with
the imperfect are: mā́bibher ná mariṣyasi (RY.) do notfear; thou wilt
not die; mā́ smāi 'tā́nt sákhīn kuruthāḥ (AV.) do not make friends
of them; mā putram anutapyathāḥ (MBh.) do not sorrow for thy son.
The relation of the imperfect to the aorist construction, in point of
frequency, is in RV. about as one to five, in AY. still less, or about
one to six; and though instances of the imperfect are quotable from
all the older texts, they are exceptional and infrequent; while in the
epics and later they become extremely rare.
b. A single optative, bhujema, is used prohibitively with mā́ in
RV.; the older language presents no other example, and the construction
is very rare also later. In an example or two, also, the precative (bhūyāt,
R. Pane.) follows mā.
c The RV. has once apparently ma with an imperative; but the
passage is probably corrupt. No other such case is met with in the older
language (unless sṛpa, TA. i. 14; doubtless a bad reading for sṛpas); but
in the epics and later the construction begins to appear, and becomes an
ordinary form of prohibition: thus, mā prayacche "śvare dhanam (H.)
do not bestow wealth on a lord; sakhi māi 'vaṁ vada (Vet.) friend, do
not speak thus.
d. The ŚB. (xi. 5.11
) appears to offer a single example of a true subjunctive
with mā, ní padyāsāi; there is perhaps something wrong about the reading.
e. In the epics and later, an aorist form not deprived of augment is
occasionally met with after mā: thus, mā tvāṁ kālo 'tyagāt (MBh.l
let not the time pass thee; mā vālipatham anv agāḥ (R.) do not follow
Tali's road. But the same anomaly occurs also two or three times in the older
language: thus, vyàpaptat (ŚB.), agās (TA.), anaśat (KS.).
580. But the use also of the optative with ná not in a prohibitive sense appears in the Veda, and becomes later a familiar construction: thus, ná riṣyema kadā́ caná (RV.) may we ^ffer no harm
at any time; ná cā 'tisṛjén ná juhuyāt (AV.) and if he do not grant
permission, let him notsacrifice; tád u táthā ná kuryāt (ŚB.) but he
must not do that so; na divā śayīta (ŚGS.) let him not sleep by day; na
tvāṁ vidyur janāḥ (MBh.) let not people know thee. This in the
later language is the correlative of the prescriptive optative, and
both are extremely common; so that in a text of prescriptive character the optative forms may come to outnumber the indicative and
imperative together (as is the case, for example, in Manu).
581. In all dependent constructions, it is still harder even in
the oldest language to establish a definite distinction between subjunctive and optative; a method of use of either is scarcely to be
found to which the other does not furnish a practical equivalent —
219 USE S OF T H E MODES . [—581
and then, in the later language, such uses are represented by the
optative alone. A few examples will be sufficient to illustrate this:
a. After relative pronouns and conjunctions in general: ya
vyūṣúr yā́ś ca nūnáṁ vyucchā́n (RV.) which have shone forth [hitherto], and which shall hereafter shine forth; yó 'to jā́yātā asmā́kaṁ
sá éko 'sat (TS.) whoever shall be born of her, let him be one of usyó vāí tā́n vidyā́t pratyákṣaṁ sá brahmā́ véditā syāt (AY.)
whoever shall know them face to face, he may pass for a knowing prieputrā́ṇāṁ . . . jātā́nāṁ janáyāś ca yā́n (AV.) ofsons born and whom
thou mayest bear; yásya . . . átithir gṛhā́n āgácchet (AV.) to whosesoever house he may come as guest; yatamáthā kāmáyeta táthā kuryā(ŚB.) in whatever way he may choose, so may he do it; yárhi hótā yája¬
mānasya nā́ma gṛhṇīyā́t tárhi brūyāt (TS.) when the sacrificing
priest shall name the name of the offerer, then he may speak; svarūpyadā draṣṭum icchethāḥ (MBh.) when thou shalt desire to see thine
own form.
b. In more distinctly conditional constructions.- yájāma devā́n
yádi śaknávāma (RV.) we will offer to the gods if we shall be able; yáagne syā́m aháṁ tváṁ tváṁ vā ghā syā́ aháṁ syúṣ ṭe satyā́
ihā́ "śíṣaḥ (RV.) if I were thou, Agni, orif thou wert I, thy wishes
should be realized on the spot; yó dyā́m atisárpāt parástān ná sá
mucyātāi váruṇasya rā́jñah (AV.) though one steal far away beyond
the sky, he shall not escape king Varuna; yád ánāśvān upaváset kṣó¬
dhukaḥ syād yád aśnīyā́d rudrô 'sya paśū́n abhí manyeta (TS.)
if he should continue without eating, he would starve;if he should eRudra would attack his cattle; prārthayed yadi māṁ kaścid daṇḍyaḥ
sa me pumān bhavet (MBh ) if any man soever should desire me, he
should suffer punishment. These and the like constructions, with the
optative, are very common in the Brāhmaṇas and later.
c. In final clauses: yáthā 'háṁ śatruhó 'sāni (AV.) that I may
be a slayer of my enemies; gṛṇānā́ yáthā píbātho ándhaḥ (RV.) that
being praised with song ye may drink the draught; urāú yáthā táva
śárman mádema (RV.) in order that we rejoice in thy wide protection;
úpa jānīta yáthe 'yám púnar āgácchet (ŚB.) contrive thatshe come
back again; kṛpāṁ kuryād yathā mayi (MBh.) so that he may take pity
on me. This is in the Veda one of the most frequent uses of the
subjunctive; and in its correlative negative form, with néd in order
that not or lest (always followed by an accented verb), it continues
not rare in the Brāhmaṇas.
d. The indicative is also very commonly used in final clauses after
yathā: thus, yáthā 'yám púruṣo 'ntárikṣam anucárati (ŚB.) in order
that this man may traverse the atmosphere; yathā na vighnaḥ kriyate so that no hindrance may arise; yathā 'yaṁ naśyati tathā vidheyam
(H.) it must be so managed that he perish.
581—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 220
e. With the conditional use of subjunctive and optative is further to
be compared that of the so-called conditional tense: see below, 950.
f. As is indicated by many of the examples given above, it is usual
in a conditional sentence, containing protasis and apodosis, to employ always
the same mode, whether subjunctive or optative (or conditional), in each
of the two clauses. For the older language, this is a rule well-nigh or
quite without exception.
582* No distinction of meaning has been established between
the modes of the present-system and those (in the older language) of
the perfect and aorist-systems.
Participles.
583. Participles, active and middle, are made from all
the tense-stems — except the periphrastic future, and, in
the later language, the aorist (and aorist participles are rare
from the beginning).
a. The participles unconnected with the tense-systems are treated in
chap. XIII. (952 ff.),
584. The general participial endings are 5RT^ant (weak
form Wf at; fem. 33rft antī or atī: see above, 449) for
the active, and 5TR ana (fem. 5TFīī 5nā) for the middle. But —
a. After a tense-stem ending in a, the active participial suffix
is virtually nt, one of the two a's being lost in the combination of
stem-final and suffix.
b. After a tense-stem ending in a, the middle participial suffix
is māna instead of āna. But there are occasional exceptions to the
rule as to the use of māna and ana respectively, which will be
pointed out in connection with the various formations below. Such
exceptions are especially frequent in the causative: see 1043f.
c. The perfect has in the active the peculiar suffix vāṃs (weakest
form uṣ, middle form vat; fem. uṣī: see, for the inflection of this
participle, above, 458 ff.).
d. For details, as to form of stem etc., and for special exceptions, see the following chapters.
Augment.
585. The augment is a short 51 a, prefixed to a tensestem —- and, if the latter begin with a vowel, combining with
that vowel irregularly into the heavier or vṛddhi diphthong
221 AUGMENT. [-587
(136 a). It is always (without any exception) the accented
element in the verbal form of which it makes a part.
a. In the Veda, the augment is in a few forms long ā: thus, ā́naṭ,
ā́var, āvṛṇi, ā́vṛṇak, āvidhyat, āyunak, ā́yukta, ā́yukṣātām,
ā́riṇak, ā́rāikjand yás ta ā́vidhat, RV.ii.1.7,9?),
586. The augment is a sign of past time. And an augmentpreterit is made from each of the tense-stems from which the system
of conjugation is derived: namely, the imperfect, from the presentstem; the pluperfect (in the Veda only), from the perfect-stem; the
conditional, from the future-stem; while in the aorist such a preterit
stands without any corresponding present indicative.
587. In the early language, especially in the RV., the occurrence
of forms identical with those of augment-tenses save for the lack of
an augment is quite frequent. Such forms lose in general, along with
the augment, the specific character of the tensesto which they belong;
and they are then employed in part non-modally, with either a present or a past sense; and in part modally, with either a subjunctive
or an optative sense — especially often and regularly after mā prohibitive (579); and this last mentioned use comes down also into the
later language.
a. In RV., the augmentless forms are more than half as common as
the augmented (about 2000 and 3300), and are made from the present,
perfect, and aorist-systems, but considerably over half from the aorist.
Their non-modal and modal uses are of nearly equal frequency. The tense
value of the non-modally used forms is more often past than present. Of
the modally used forms, nearly a third are construed with mā prohibitive;
the rest have twice as often an optative as a proper subjunctive value.
b. In AV‚, the numerical relations are very different. The augment¬
less forms are less than a third as many as the augmented (about 475 to
1450), and are prevailingly (more than four fifths) aoristic. The non-modal
uses are only a tenth of the modal. Of the modally used forms, about
four fifths are construed with mā prohibitive; the rest are chiefly optative
in value. Then, in the language of the Brāhmaṇas (not including the
mantra - material which they contain), the loss of augment is, save in
occasional sporadic cases, restricted to the prohibitive construction with mā;
and the same continues to be the case later.
c. The accentuation of the augmentless forms is throughout in accordance with that of unaugmented tenses of similar formation. Examples will
be given below, under the various tenses.
d. Besides the augmentless aorist-forms with mā prohibitive, there
are also found occasionally in the later language augmentless impeifect-forms
(very rarely aorist-forms), which have the same value as if they were augmented, and are for the most part examples of metrical license. They are
especially frequent in the epics (whence some scores of them are quotable).
588-] VIII. CONJUGATION. 222
Reduplication.
588. The derivation of conjugational and declensional
stems from roots by reduplication, either alone or along
with other formative elements, has been already spoken of
(259), and the formations in which reduplication appears
have been specified: they are, in primary verb-inflection,
the present (of a certain class of verbs), the perfect (of
nearly all), and the aorist (of a large number); and the intensive and desiderative secondary conjugations contain in
their stems the same element.
589. The general principle of reduplication is the pre¬
fixion to a root of a part of itself repeated — if it begin
with consonants, the initial consonant and the vowel; if it
begin with a vowel, that vowel, either alone or with a following consonant. The varieties of detail, however, are very
considerable. Thus, especially, as regards the vowel, which
in present and perfect and desiderative is regularly shorter
and lighter in the reduplication than in the root-syllable,
in aorist is longer, and in intensive is strengthened. The
differences as regards an initial consonant are less, and
chiefly confined to the intensive; for the others, certain
general rules may be here stated, all further details being
left to be given in connection with the account of the separate formations.
590. The consonant of the reduplicating syllable is in
general the first consonant of the root: thus, paprach
from √5"f prach; fcrf-ZJ" śiśri from √F2T śri; " ~ ^ bubudh
from √~-]\ But —
a. A non-aspirate is substituted in reduplication for an
aspirate: thus, dadhā from √ŚJT; Í^H bibhṛ from √H bhṛ.
b. A palatal is substituted for a guttural or for ~ h :
2 2 3 REDUPLICATION . [—592
thus, cakṛ from √5R kṛ; Rlfisl^ cikhid from yfiā^ khid;
sT-3HJagrabh from √īTH^grabh; x"f jahṛ from √
—
' hṛ.
c. The occasionalreversion, on the other hand, of a palatal in the
radical syllable to guttural form has been noticed above (2161).
d. Of two initial consonants, the second, if it be a
non-nasal mute preceded by a sibilant, is repeated instead
of the first: thus, cJTcT tasṭr from √~f stṛ; cT"īī tasthā from
yWĪ sthā; -c!Hv^ caskand from y Wr'4 skand; TR-Iāś^
easkhal from √"H5T skhal; ~~-T cuśeut from √"~f ścut;
~ F ~ paspṛdh from √F7-T spṛdh; pusphuṭ from √~~;
sphuṭ: — but H“TT sasnā from y~T snā; ŚJFT sasmṛ from
√FT smṛ; īīsusru from √^ sru; Í^IÍ^M^śiśliṣ from √fk~
śliṣ.
Accent of the Verb.
591. The statements which have been made above, and those
which will be made below, as to the accent of verbal forms, apply
to those cases in which the verb is actually accented.
a. But, according to the grammarians, and according to the invariable practice in accentuated texts, the verb is in the majority of
its occurrences unaccented or toneless.
b. That is to say, of course, the verb in its proper forms, its personal
or so-called finite forms. The verbal nouns and adjectives, or the infinitives
and participles, are subject to precisely the same laws of accent as other
nouns and adjectives.
592. The general rule, covering most of the cases, is this: The
verb in an independent clause is unaccented, unless it stand at the
beginning of the clause —or also, in metrical text, at the beginning
of a pāda.
a. For the accent of the verb, as well as for that of the vocative
case (above, 314 c), the beginning of a pāda counts as that of a sentence,
whatever be the logical connection of the pāda with what precedes it.
b. Examples of the unaccented verb are: agním īḍe puróhitam
Agni I praise, the house-priest; sá id devéṣu gacchati that, truly, goes to
the gods; ágne sūpāyanó bhava 0 Agni, be easy of access; idám indra
śṛṇuhi somapa this, 0 Indra, soma-drinker, hear; námas te rudra
kṛmnaḥ homage to thee, Rudra, we offer; yajamānasya paśū́n pāhi
the sacrifice's cattle protect thou.
o. Hence, there are two principal situations in which the verb
retains its accent:
593—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 2 2 4
593. First, the verb is accented when it stands at the beginning
of a clause — or, in verse, of a pāda.
a. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the sentence are,
in prose, śúndhadhvaṁ dāívyāya kármaṇe be pure for the divine
ceremony; āpnótī 'máṁ lokám he wins this world; — in verse, where
the head of the sentence is also that of the pāda, syā́mé 'd índrasya
śármaṇi may we be in Indra's protection; darśáya mā yātudhā́nān
show me the sorcerers; gámad vā́jebhir ā́ sá nah may he come with good
things to us; — in verse, where the head of the clause is within the pāda,
téṣām pāhi śrudhī́ hávam drink of them, hear our call; sástu mātā́
Bàstu pitā́ sástu śvā́ sástu viśpátiḥ let the mother sleep, let the father
sleep, let the dog sleep, let the master sleep; víśvakarman námas te
pāhy àsmā́n 7iśvakarman, homage to thee; protect usI yuvā́m... rā́jña
ūce duhitā́ pṛcché vāṁ narā the king's daughter said to you "I pray you,
ye men"; vayáṁ te váya indra viddhí ṣu ṇaḥ prá bharāmahe we
offerthee, Indra, strengthening; take note of us.
b. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the pāda when this
is not the head of the sentence are: áthā te ántamānāṁ vidyā́ma
sumatīnā́m so may we enjoy thy most intimate favors; dhātā́ 'syā́
agrúvāi pátiṁ dádhātu pratikāmyàm Dhātar bestow upon this girl a
husband according to her wish; yātudhā́nasya somapa jahi prajam
slay, 0 Soma-drinker, the progeny of the sorcerer.
594. Certain special cases under this head are as follows:
a. As a vocative forms no syntactical part of the sentence to which
it is attached, but is only an external appendage to it, a verb following
an initial vocative, or more than one, is accented, as if it were itself initial
in the clause or pāda: thus, ā́śrutkarṇa śrudhī́ hávam 0 thou of
listening ears, hear our call! sī́te vándāmohe tvā 0 8ìtā, we reverence
thee; víśve devā vásavo rákṣate 'mám all ye gods, ye Vasus, protect
this man; utā́ "gaś cakrúṣaṁ devā dévā jīváyathā púnaḥ likewise
him, 0 gods,who has committed crime, ye gods, ye make to live again.
b. If more than one verb follow a word or words syntactically connected with them all, only the first loses its accent, the others being treated
as if they were initial verbs in separate clauses, with the same adjuncts
understood: thus, taráṇir íj jayati kṣéti púṣyati successful he conquers,
rules, thrives; amítrān.. • párāca indra prá mṛṇā jahī́ ca our foes,
Indra, drive far away and slay; asmábhyaṁ jeṣi yótsi ca for us conquer
and fight; ágnīṣomā havíṣoḥ prásthitasya vītáṁ háryataṁ vṛṣaṇā
juṣéthām 0 Agni and Soma, of the oblation set forth partake, enjoy, ye
mighty ones, take pleasure.
c. In like manner (but much less often), an adjunct, as subject or object,
standing between two verbs and logically belonging to both, isreckoned to the
first alone, and the second has the initial accent: thus, jah í prajā́ṁ náyasv a
ca slay the progeny, and bring [it] hither; śṛṇót u naḥ subhág ā bódhat u
tmán ā may the blessed one hear us, [and may she] kindly regard [us].
225 ACCENT . [-595
d. It has even come to be a formal rule that a verb immediately
following another verb is accented: thus, sá yá etám evám upā́ste
pūryáte prajáyā paśúbhiḥ (ŚB.) whoever worships him thus isfilledwith
offspring and cattle.
595. Second, the verb is accented, whatever its position, in a
dependent clause.
a. The dependency of a clause is in the very great majority of cases
conditioned by the relative pronoun ya, or one of its derivatives or compounds. Thus: yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási what offering thou protectest;
ó té yanti yé aparī́ṣu páśyān they are coming who shall behold her
hereafter; saná yán me ásti téna along with that which is mine; yátra
noḥ pū́rve pitáraḥ pareyúḥ whither our fathers of old departed; adyā́
murīya yádi yātudhā́no ásmi let me die on the spot, if I am a sorcerer; yáthā́ 'hāny anupūrvám bhávanti as days follow one another
in order; yā́vad idám bhúvanaṁ víśvam ásti how great this whole
creation is; yátkāmās te juhumás tán no astu what desiring we sacrifice to thee, let that become ours; yatamás títṛpsāt whichever one desires
to enjoy.
b. The presence of a relative word in the sentence does not, of course,
accent the verb, unless this is really the predicate of a dependent clause:
thus, ápa tyé tāyávo yathā yanti they make off like thieves (as thieves
do); yát stnā́ jágac ca rejate whatever [is] immovable and movable
trembles; yathākā́maṁ ní padyate he lies down at his pleasure.
c. The particle ca when it means if, and céd (ca+id) if, give an
accent to the verb: thus, brahmā́ céd dhástam ágrahīt if a Brahman
has grasped her hand; tváṁ ca soma no váśo jīvā́tuṁ ná marāmahe
if thou, Soma, wiliest us to live, we shall not die; ā́ ca gácchān mitrám
enā dadhāma if he will come here, we will make friends with him.
d. There are a very few passages in which the logical dependence of
a clause containing no subordinating word appears to give the verb its
accent: thus, sám áśvaparṇā ś cáranti no nár o 'smā́kam indra
rathín o jayantu when our men, horse-winged, come into conflict, let the
chariot-fighters of our side, 0 Indra, win the victory. Rarely, too, an imperative so following another imperative that its action may seem a consequence
of the latter's is accented: thus, tū́yam ā́ gahi káṇveṣ u sú sác ā píb a
come hither quickly; drink along with theKanvas (i. e, in order to drink").
e. A few other particles give the verb an accent, in virtue of a slight
subordinating force belonging to them: thus, especially hi (with its negation nahi), which in its fullest value means for, but shades off from that
into ,a mere asseverative sense; the verb or verbs connected with it are
always accented: thus, ví té muñcantāṁ vimúco hi sánti let them
release him, for they are releasers; yác cid dhí... anāśastā́ iva smási
if we, forsooth, are as it were unrenowned; — also néd (ná+íd), meaning
lest, that not: thus, nét tvā tápāti sū́ro arcíṣā that the sun may not
bum thee with his beam; virā́jaṁ néd vicchinádānī́ 'ti saying to himself\
595—] VIII. CONJUGATION. 226
"lest I cut of the virāj" (such cases are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas); —
and the interrogative kuvid whether? thus, ukthébhiḥ kuvíd āgámat
will he come hither for our praises?
596. But further, the verb of a prior clause is not infrequently
accented in antithetical construction.
a. Sometimes, the relation of the two clauses is readily capable of
being regarded as that of protasis and apodosis; but often, also, such a
relation is very indistinct; and the cases of antithesis shade off into those
of ordinary coordination, the line between them appearing to be rather
arbitrarily drawn.
b. In many cases, the antithesis is made distincter by the presence
in the two clauses of correlative words, especially anya — anya, eka—
eka, vā—vā, ca—ca: thus, prá-prā 'nyé yánti páry anyá āsate
some go on and on, others sit about (as if it were while some go etc.) ; úd
vā siñcádhvam úpa vā pṛṇadhvam either pour out, or fill up;sáṁ
ce 'dhyásvā 'gne prá ca vardhaye 'mám both do thou thyself beeome
kindled, Agni, and do thou increase this person. But it is also made without such help: thus, prā́ 'jātāḥ prajā́ janáyati pari prájātā gṛhṇāti
the unborn progeny he generates, the born he embraces; ápa yuṣmád ákra¬
mīn nā́ 'smā́n upā́vartate [though] she has gone away from you, she
does not come to us; nā́ 'ndhô 'dhvaryúr bhávati ná yajñáṁ rákṣāṃsi
ghnanti the priest does not become blind, the demons do not destroy the
sacrifice; kéna sómā gṛhyánte kéna hūyante by whom [on the one hand]
are the somas dipped out ? by whom [on the other hand] are they offered ?
597. Where the verb would be the same in the two antithetical clauses,
it is not infrequently omitted in the second: thus, beside complete expressions like urvī́ cā́ 'si vásvī cā 'si both thou art broad and thou art good,
occur, much oftener, incomplete ones like agnír amúṣmiṃ loká ā́sīd
yamó 'smín Agni was in yonder world, Yama [was] in this; asthnā́
'nyā́ḥ prajā́h pratitíṣṭhanti māṃsénā 'nyā́h by bone some creatures
standfirm,byfleshothers; dvipā́c ca sárvaṁ no rákṣa cátuṣpād yác ca
nah svám both protect everything of ours that is biped, and also whatevethat is quadruped belongs to us.
a. Accentuation of the verb in the former of two antithetical clauses
is a rule more strictly followed in the Brāhmaṇas than in the Veda, and
least strictly in the RV.: thus, in RV., abhí dyā́m mahinā́ bhuvam
(not bhúvam) abhì 'mā́m pṛthivī́m mahī́m I am superior to the sky
in greatness, also to this great earth; and even índro vidur áṅgirasaś ca
ghorā́ḥ Indra knows, and the terrible Angirases.
598. There are certain more or less doubtful cases in which a
verb-form is perhaps accented for emphasis.
a. Thus, sporadically before caná in any wise, and in connection
with asseverative particles, as kíla, aṅgá, evá, and (in ŚB,, regularly)
hánta: thus, hánte 'mam pṛthivī́ṁ vibhájāmahāi come on! let us
share up this earth.
227 PRESENT-SYSTEM. [—601
CHAPTE R I X .
THE PRESENT-SYSTEM.
599. T H E present-system, or system of forms coming
from the present-stem, is composed (as was pointed out
above) of a present indicative tense, together with a subjunctive (mostly lost in the classical language), an optative,
an imperative, and a participle, and also a past tense, an
augment-preterit, to which we give (by analogy with the
Greek) the name of imperfect.
a. These forms often go in Sanskrit grammars by the name of
"special tenses", while the other tense-systems are styled "general tenses"
— as if the former were made from a special tense-stem or modified root,
while the latter came, all alike, from the root itself. There is no reason
why such a distinction and nomenclature should be retained; since, on the
one hand, the "special tenses" come in one set of verbs directly from the
root, and, on the other hand, the other tense-systems are mostly made from
stems — and, in the case of the aorist, from stems having a variety of
form comparable with that of present-stems.
600. Practically, the present-system is the most prominent and important part of the whole conjugation, since,
from the earliest period of the language, its forms are very
much more frequent than those of all the other systems
together.
a. Thus, in the Veda, the occurrences of personal forms of this system
are to those of all others about as three to one; in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa,
as five to one; in the Hitopadeśa, as six to one; in the Śakuntalā, as
eight to one; in Manu, as thirty to one.
601. And, as there is also great variety in the manner
in which different roots form their present-stem, this, as
being their most conspicuous difference, is made the basis
of their principal classification; and a verb is said to be of
this or of that conjugation, or class, according to the way
in which its present-stem is made and inflected.
eo2—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 228
602. In a small minority of verbs, the present-stem is
identical with the root. Then there are besides (excluding
the passive and causative) seven more or less different methods of forming a present-stem from the root, each method
being followed by a larger or smaller number of verbs.
These are the "classes" or "conjugation-classes", as laid
down by the native Hindu grammarians. They are arranged by the latter in a certain wholly artificial and unsystematic order (the ground of which has never been discovered); and they are wont to be designated in European
works according to this order, or else, after Hindu example,
by the root standing at the head of each class in the Hindu
lists. A different arrangement and nomenclature will be
followed here, namely as below — the classes being divided (as is usual in European grammars) into two more
general classes or conjugations, distinguished from one another by wider differences than those which separate the
special classes.
603. The classes of the FIRS T or NON-a-CoNJUGATiON
are as follows:
I. The root-class (second class, or ad-class, of
the Hindu grammarians); its present-stem is coincident
with the root itself: thus, ad eat; ^ i go; ETTīī^ās
sit; 7JĪ yā go/ FZQ dviṣ hate; 3~J duh milk.
II. The reduplicatin g class (third or hu-class);
the root is reduplicated to form the present-stem:
thus, ~ ~ juhu from √~" hu sacrifice; dadā from
√3J dā give; fÌRbibhṛ from √H bhṛ bear.
H L The nasal class (seventh or rudh-class); a
nasal, extended to the syllable ft na in strong forms, is
inserted before the final consonant of the root: thus,
"Ś^rund h (or ^rira^ruṇadh) from √Śfc^rudh obstruct;
īī~^ yuñj (or īī~H^yunaj) from √*Jft^yuj -join.
229 CONJUGATION-CLASSES. [—605
IV. a. The nu-class (fifth or su-class); the syllable nu is added to the root: thus, Wi sunu from
√īī su press out; 3^Tīī āpnu from √-5TR^āp obtain.
b. A very small number (only half-a-dozen) of
roots ending already in and also one very common
and quite irregularly inflected root not so ending (
—
kṛ make), add 3 u alone to form the present-stem. This
is the eighth or tan-class of the Hindu grammarians; it
may be best ranked by us as a sub-class, the u-class:
thus, cFJ tanu from √fT"J;an stretch.
V . The na-class (ninth or krī-class); the syllable
m nā (or, in weak forms, nī) is added to the root:
thus, sFftaT krīṇā (or śfíìuíì krīṇī) from √ ^ krī buy;
~PTT stabhnā (or Fcpft stabhnī) from √F?P^stabh establish.
604. These classes have in common, as their most fundamental characteristic, a shift of accent: the tone being
now upon the ending, and now upon the root or the classsign. Along with this goes a variation in the stem itself,
which has a stronger or fuller form when the accent rests
upon it, and a weaker or briefer form when the accent is
on the ending these: forms are to be distinguished as the
strong stem and the weak stem respectively (in part, both
have been given above). The classes also form their optative active, their 2d sing, imperative, their 3d pi. middle,
and their middle participle, in a different manner from the
others.
605. In the classes of the SECOND or a-CoNJUGATioN,
the present-stem ends in a, and the accent has a fixed
place, remaining always upon the same syllable of the
stem, and never shifted to the endings. Also, the optative,
the 2d sing, impv., the 3d pi. middle, and the middle par-
605—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 230
ticiple, are (as just stated) unlike those of the other conjugation.
606. The classes of this conjugation are as follows:
VI. The a-class‚ or unaccented a-class (first
or bhū-class); the added class-sign is a simply; and the
root, which has the accent, is (if capable of it) strengthened by guṇa throughout: thus, -"f bháva from √H bhū
be; -TO" náya from √*ft nī lead; 5T" bódha from √"4"
budh wake; <~T vada from vad speak.
VII. The a-class‚ or accented a-class (sixth or
tud-class); the added class-sign is a, as in the preceding
class; but it has the accent, and the unaccented root
remains unstrengthened: thus, c~f tudá from √cpr tud
thrust; ŚfxT sṛjá from √HxFT sṛj let loose; ŚT5T suvá from
C C "S o
√īī SŪ give birth.
VIII. The ya-class (fourth or div-class); ya is
added to the root, which has the accent: thus, ^5ET
dívya from √f^5^div (more properly ^5f^dīv: see 765)
play; - T -
náhya from √ ^ nah bind; sREET krúdhya
from √^j^krudh be angry.
I X. The passive conjugation is also properly a
present-system only, having a class-sign which is not
extended into the other systems; though it differs markedly from the remaining classes in having a specific
meaning, and in being formable in the middle voice
from all transitive verbs. Its inflection may therefore
best be treated next to that of the ya-class, with which
it is most nearly connected, differing from it as the
a-class from the a-class. It forms its stem, namely, by
adding an accented yá to the root: thus, ERtT adya from
√ET~ ad eat; rudhyá from √"^rudh obstruct;
«pET budhyá from √~T^budh wake; ?p~ tudyá from
√r~T tud thrust.
2 3 1 CONJUGATION-CLASSES. [—611
607. The Hindu grammariansreckon a tenth class or cur-class,
having a class-sign áya added to a strengthened root (thus, coráya
from √cur), and an inflection like that of the other a-stems. Since,
however, this stem is not limited to the present-system, but extends
also into the rest of the conjugation — while it also has to a great
extent a causative value, and may be formed in that value from a
large number of roots — it will be best treated in full along with
the derivative conjugations (chap. XIV., 1041 ff.).
608. A small number of roots add in the present-system a ch,
or substitute a ch for their final consonant, and form a stem ending
in cha or chá, which is then inflected like any a-stem. This is
historically, doubtless, a true class-sign, analogous with the rest;
but the verbs showing it are so few, and in formation so irregular,
that they are not well to be put together into a class, but may best
be treated as special cases falling under the other classes.
a. Roots adding ch are ṛ and yu, which make the stems ṛcchá and
yúccha.
b. Roots substituting ch for their final are iṣ, uṣ (or vas shine),
gam, yam, which make the stems icchá, ucchá, gáccha, yáccha.
c. Of the so-called roots ending in ch, several are more or less
clearly stems, whose use has been extended from the present to other systems
of tenses.
609. Roots are not wholly limited, even in the later language, to
one mode of formation of their present-stem, [but are sometimes reckoned
as belonging to two or more different conjugation-classes. And such variety
of formation is especially frequent in the Veda, being exhibited by a
considerable proportion of the roots there occurring; already in the Brāhmaṇas,
however, a condition is reached nearly agreeing in this respect with the
classical language. The different present-formations sometimes have differences of meaning; yet not more important ones than are often found belonging to the same formation, nor of a kind to show clearly a difference of
value as originally belonging to the separate classes of presents. If anything
of this kind is to be established, it must be from the derivative conjugations,
which are separated by no fixed line from the present-systems.
610. We take up now the different classes, in the order in
which they have been arranged above, to describe more in detail, and
with illustration, the formation of their present-systems, and to notice
the irregularities belonging under each class.
I. Root-class (second, ad-class).
611. In this class there is no class-sign; the root itself
is also present-stem, and to it are added directly the per-
611—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM . 232
sonal endings — but combined in subjunctive and optative
with the respective mode-signs; and in the imperfect the
augment is prefixed to the root.
a. The accented endings (552) regularly take the accent —
except in the imperfect, where it falls on the augment — and before
them the root remains unchanged; before the unaccented endings,
the root takes the guṇa-strengthening.
b. It is only in the first three classes that the endings come immediately in contact with a final consonant of the root, and that the rules for
consonant combination have to be noted and applied. In these classes, then,
additional paradigms will be given, to illustrate the modes of combination.
1. Present Indicative.
612. The endings are the primary (with 5R ate in 3d
pI. mid.), added to the bare root. The root takes the accent,
and has guṇa, if capable of it, in the three persons sing. act.
Example s of inflection : a. active, root ^ i go:
strong form of root-stem, “ é; weak form, ^ i ; middle, root
as sit, stem as (irregularly accented throughout: 628).
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
émi ivás imás ā́se ā́svahe ā́smahe
éṣi ithás ithá ā́sse ā́sāthe ā́ddhve
éti itás yánti ā́ste ā́sāte ā́sate
b. root dviṣ hate; strong stem-form, dvéṣ; weak, dviṣ. For
rules of combination for the final ṣ, see 226.
1 dvéṣmi dviṣvás dviṣmás dviṣé dviṣváhe dviṣmáhe
2 dvékṣi dviṣṭhás dviṣṭhá dvikṣé dviṣā́the dviḍḍhvé
3 dvéṣṭi dviṣṭás dviṣánti dviṣṭé dviṣā́te dviṣáte
o. root duh milk: strong stem-form, dóh; weak, duh. For rules
of combination for the final h, and for the conversion of the initial
to dh, see 222 a, 155, 160.
1 dóhmi duhvás duhmás duhé duhváhe duhmáhe
2 dhókṣi dugdhás dugdhá dhukṣé duhā́the dhugdhvé
3 dógdhi dugdhàs duhánti dugdhé duhā́te duháte
233 ROOT-CLASS (SECOND, ad–CLASS). [—615
d. root lih lick.- strong stem, léh; weak, lih. For rules of
combination of the final h, see 222 b.
1 léhmi lihvás lihmás lihé lihváhe lihmáhe
2 lékṣi līḍhás līḍhá likṣé lihā́the līḍhvé
3 léḍhi līḍhás lihánti līḍhé lihā́te liháte
613. Examples of the 3d sing. mid. coincident in form with the 1st
sing, are not rare in the older language (both V . and B,): the most frequent
examples are ī́śe, duhé, vidé, śáye; more sporadic are cité, bruve, huvé.
To tha of the 2d pi. is added na in sthána, pathánā, yāthána.
The irregular accent of the 3d pi. mid. is found in RV. in rihaté, duhaté.
Examples of the same person in re and rate also occur: thus (besides
those mentioned below, 629—30, 635), vidré, and, with auxiliary vowel,
arhire (unless these are to be ranked, rather, as perfect forms without
reduplication: 790b).
2. Present Subjunctive.
614. Subjunctive forms of this class are not uncommon in the
older language, and nearly all those which the formation anywhere
admits are quotable, from Veda or from Brāhmaṇa. A complete
paradigm, accordingly, is given below, with the few forms not
actually quotable for this class enclosed in brackets. We may take
as models (as above), for the active the root i go, and for the
middle the root ās sit, from both of which numerous forms are met
with (although neither for these nor for any others can the whole
series be found in actual use).
a. The mode-stems are áya (é+a) and ā́sa (ā́s+a) respectively.
l
2
3
s. d. p. s. d. p.
áyāni
áyā
áyasi
áyas
áyati
áyat
asāi
ā́sase
ā́sāsāi
ā́sate
ā́sātāi
active. middle.
ā́sāvahāi
[ā́sāvahe]
[ā́sāithe]
ā́sāite
ā́sāmahāi
[ā́sāmahe]
[ā́sadhve]
ā́sādhvāi
[ā́sante]-nta
ā́sāntāi
615. The RV. has no middle forms in āi except those of the first
person. The 1st. sing. act. in ā occurs only in RV., in ayā, bravā,
stávā. The 2d and 3d sing. act. with primary endings are very unusual
in the Brāhmaṇas. Forms irregularly made with long ā, like those from
present-stems in a, are not rare in A V. and B.: thus, ayās, ayāt, áyān;
ásāt, brávāt; bravāthas; asātha, ayātha, bravātha, hanātha;
ádān, dohān. Of middle forms with secondary endings are found hánanta,
3d pl,, and īśata, 3d sing, (after mā́ prohibitive), which is an isolated
example. The only dual person in āite is brávāite.
áyāva áyāma
áyathas áyatha
áyatas áyan
616—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 234
3. Present Optative.
616. The personal endings combined with the modesigns of this mode (TU yā in act., | ī in mid.) have been
given in full above (566). The stem-form is the unaccented
and unstrengthened root.
active. middle.
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i ^TT5T ^TTīī 5Tīīfì" -Ml4kí^ MW1HÍ^
iyā́m iyā́va iyā́ma ā́sīya ā́sīvahi ā́sīmahi
iyā́s iyā́tam iyā́ta ā́sīthās ā́sīyāthām ā́sīdhvam
iyā́t iyā́tām iyús ā́sīta ā́sīyātām ā́sīran
a. In the same manner, from √dviṣ, dviṣyā́m and dviṣīyá; from
√duh, duhyā́m and duhīyá; from √lih, lihyā́m and lihīyá. The
inflection is so regular that the example above given is enough, with
the addition of dviṣīyá, to show the normal accentuation in the
middle: thus, sing, dviṣīyá, dviṣīthā́s, dviṣītá; du. dviṣīváhi,
dviṣīyā́thām, dviṣīyā́tām; pl. dviṣīmáhi, dviṣīdhvám, dviṣīrán.
b. The RV. has once tana in 2d pl. act. (in syātana).
4. Present Imperative.
617. The imperative adds, in second and third persons,
its own endings (with 5FTFT atām in 3d pi. mid.) directly
to the root-stem. The stem is accented and strengthened
in 3d sing, act.; elsewhere, the accent is on the ending
and the root remains unchanged. The first persons, so called,
of the later language are from the old subjunctive, and
have its strengthened stem and accent; they are repeated
here from where they were given above (614 a). In the 2d
sing, act., the ending is regularly (as in the two following
classes) fsj dhi if the root end with a consonant, and f% hi
if it end with a vowel. As examples we take the roots
already used for the purpose.
235 ROOT-CLAS S (SECOND, ad-CLASS). [—619
a. Thus, from the roots ^ i and ETR-M-s:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
l mm mm m\ mr&^ mrm^
áyāni áyāva áyāma ā́sāi ā́sāvahāi ā́sāmahāi
ihí itám itá ā́ssva ā́sāthām ā́ddhvam
3
ŚcT ĪĪTT MIWI ^ ^ncTTīī MWHI- ^
étu itā́m yántu ā́stām ā́sātām ā́satām
b. From the roots dviṣ and duh and lih:
1 dvéṣāṇi dvéṣāva dvéṣāma dvéṣāi dvéṣāvahāi dvéṣāmahāi
2 dviḍḍhí dviṣṭám dviṣṭá dvikṣvá dviṣā́thām dviḍḍhvám
3 dvéṣṭu dviṣṭā́m dviṣántu dviṣṭā́m dviṣā́tām dviṣátām
1 dóhāni dóhāva dóhāma dóhāi dóhāvahāi dóhāmahāi
2 dugdhí dugdhám dugdhá dhukṣvá duhā́thām dhugdhvám
3 dógdhu dugdhā́m duhántu dugdhā́m duhā́tām duhátām
1 léhāni léhāva léhāma léhāi léhāvahāi léhāmahāi
2 līḍhí līḍhám līḍhá likṣvá lihā́thām līḍhvám
3 léḍhu līḍhā́m lihàntu līḍhā́m lihā́tām lihátām
618. The 2d sing. act. ending tat is found in the older language in
a few verbs of this class: namely, vittā́t, vītāt, brūtā́t, hatāt, yātāt,
stutāt. In 3d sing, mid., two or three verbs have in the older language
the ending ām: thus, duhā́m (only RV. case), vidām, śayām; and in
3d pi. mid. AV. has duhrā́m and duhratām. The use of tana for ta
in 2d pi. act. is quite frequent in the Veda: thus, itana, yātána, attana,
etc. And in stota, éta etana, bravītana, śāstána, hantana, we have
examples in the same person of a strong (and accented) stem.
5. Present Participle.
619. a. The active participle has the ending śRT^ant
(weak stem-form 5TrT^at) added to the unstrengthened root.
Mechanically, it may be formed from the 3d pi. by dropping
the final § i . Thus, for the verbs inflected above, the active
participles are nrj^yant, 3^n^duhant, fês^dviṣant, f^Tscīī^
lihant. The feminine stem ends usually in Efcft atí: thus,
īīrft yatí, duhatí, íáNcíì dviṣatí, ÜT-Ścft lihatí: but,
from roots in ā, in cflrft āntī or STIcft ātí (449 g).
619—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 236
b. The middle participle has the ending EfT" āna, added
to the unstrengthened root: thus, ^JFT iyāna, "*-~R duhāna,
ï&müì dviṣāṇá, Íd-^H lihāná.
c. The root ās forms the anomalous and isolated ā́sīna (in RY.
also āsāná).
d. But a number of these participles in the older language have
a double accent, either on the ending or on the radical syllable:
thus, īśāná and ī́śāna, ohāná and óhāna, duhāná and dúhāna (also
dúghāna), rihāṇá and ríhāṇa, vidāná and vídāna, suvāná and
súvāna, stuvāná and stavāná and stávāna — the last having -in
part also a strong form of the root.
6. Imperfect.
620. This tense adds the secondary endings to the root
as increased by prefixion of the augment. The root has the
guṇa-strengthening (if capable of it) in the three persons of
the singular active, although the accent is always upon the
augment. Examples of inflection are:
a. From the roots ^ i and ETFīī ās:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
ā́yam āíva āíma ā́si ā́svahi ā́smahi
āís āítam āíta ā́sthās ā́sāthām ā́ddhvam
āít āítām ā́yan ā́sta ā́sātām ā́sata
b. From the roots dviṣ and duh and lih:
1 ádveṣam ádviṣva ádviṣma ádviṣi ádviṣvahi ádviṣmahi
2 ádveṭ ádviṣṭam ádviṣṭa ádviṣṭhās ádviṣāthām ádviḍḍhvam
3 ádveṭ ádviṣṭām ádviṣan ádviṣṭa ádviṣātām ádviṣata
1 ádoham áduhva áduhma áduhi áduhvahi áduhmahi
2 ádhok ádugdham ádugdha ádugdhās áduhāthām ádhugdhvam
3 ádhok ádugdhām áduhan ádugdha áduhātām áduhata
1 áleham álihva álihma álihi álihvahi álihmahi
2 áleṭ álīḍham álīḍha álīḍhās álihāthām álīḍhvam
3 áleṭ álīḍhām álihan álīḍha álihātām álihata
621. a. Roots ending in ā may in the later language optionally
take us instead of an in 3d pl. act. (the ā being lost before it); and
237 ROOT-CLASS (SECOND, ad-CLASS). [—625
in the older they always do so: thus, áyus from √yā, ápus from
√pā protect, abhus from √bhā. The same ending is also allowed
and met with in the case of a few roots ending in consonants : namely
vid know, cakṣ, dviṣ, duh, mṛj. RV. has atviṣus.
b. The ending tana, 2d pi. act., is found in the Veda in áyātana,
ásastana, āítana, ábravītana. A strong stem is seen in the 1st pi.
homa, and the 2d pi. abravīta and ábravītana.
c. To save the characteristic endings in 2d and 3d sing, act., the
root ad inserts a: thus, ā́das, ā́dat; the root as inserts I: thus, ā́sīs,
ā́sīt (see below, 636); compare also 631—4.
622. The use of the persons of this tense, without augment, in the
older language, has been noticed above (587). Augmentless imperfects of
this class are rather uncommon in the Veda: thus, hàn, vés, 2d sing.;
han, vet, staut, dán (?), 3d sing.; bruvan, duhús, cakṣus, 3d pi.;
vasta, sūta, 3d sing. mid.
623. The first or root-form of aorist is identical in its formation with
this imperfect: see below, 829ff.
624. In the Veda (but hardly outside of the RV.) are found certain
2d sing, forms, having an imperative value, made by adding the ending si
to the (accented and strengthened) root. In part, they are the only root-forms
belonging to the rootsfrom which they come : thus, jóṣi (for jóṣṣi , from √juṣ),
dhákṣi , párṣi (√pṛ pass), prā́si, bhakṣi, ratsi, sátsi, hoṣi; but the
majority of them have forms (one or more) of a root-present, or sometimes
of a root-aorist, beside them: thus, kṣéṣi (√kṣi rule), jéṣi , dárṣi , nakṣi
(√naś attain), néṣi , mátsi, māsi (√mā measure), yákṣi , yáṁsi, yāsi,
yótsi, rā́si, vákṣi (√vah), véṣi , śróṣi , sakṣi. Their formal character
is somewhat disputed; but they are probably indicative persons of the
root-class, used imperatively.
625. Forms of this class are made from nearly 150 roots,
either in the earlier language, or in the later, or in both: namely,
from about 50 through the whole life of the language, from 80 in the
older period (of Veda, Brāhmaṇa, and Sūtra) alone, and from a few
(about 15) in the later period (epic and classical) only*. Not a few
of these roots, however, show only sporadic root-forms, beside a more
usual conjugation of some other class; nor is it in all cases possible
to separate clearly root-present from root-aorist forms.
a. Many roots of this class, as of the other classes of the first
conjugation, show transfers to the second or a-conjugation, forming
a conjugation-stem by adding a to their strong or weak stem, or
* Such statements of numbers, with regard to the various parts of the
system of conjugation, are in all cases taken from the author's Supplement
to this grammar, entitled "Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of
the Sanskrit Language", where lists of roots, and details as to forms etc.,
are also given.
625—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 238
even to both: thus, from √mṛj, both mārja (627) and mṛja. Such
transfers are met with even in the oldest language; but they usually
become more frequent later, often establishing a new mode of present
inflection by the side of, or in substitution for, the earlier mode.
b. A number of roots offer irregularities of inflection; these
are, in the main, pointed out in the following paragraphs.
Irregularities of the Root-class.
626. The roots of the class ending in u have in their strong
forms the vṛddhi instead of theguṇa-strengtheningbefore an ending
beginning with a consonant: thus, from √stu, stāúmi, ástāut, and
the like: but ástavam, stávāni, etc.
a. Roots found to exhibit this peculiarity in actual use are kṣṇu,
yu unite,su (or sū) impel, sku, stu, snu (these in the earlier language),
nu, ru, and hnu. RV. has once stoṣi, and anāvan. Compare also 633.
627. The root mṛj also has the vṛddhi-vowel in its strong
forms: thus, mā́rjmi, ámārjam, ámārṭ (150b); and the same strengthening is said to be allowed in weak forms before endings beginning
with a vowel: thus, mārjantu, amārjan; but the only quotable case
is mārjīta (LŚSJ. Forms from a-stems begin to appear already
in AV.
a. In the other tense-systems, also, and in derivation, mṛj shows
often the vṛddhi instead of the guṇa-strengthening.
628. A number of roots accent the radical syllable throughout,
both in strong and in weak forms: thus, all those beginning with a
long vowel, ās, īḍ, īr, īś; and also cakṣ, takṣ, trā, niṃs, vas clothe,
śiñj, śī lie, and sū. All these, except takṣ and trā (and trā also in
the Vedic forms), are ordinarily conjugated in middle voice only.
Forms with the same irregular accent occur now and then in the
Veda from other verbs: thus, mátsva, yákṣva, sákṣva, sā́kṣva,
ṛ́dhat. Middle participles so accented have been noticed above (619d).
629. Of the roots mentioned in the last paragraph, śī lie has
the guṇa-strengthening throughout: thus, śáye, śéṣe, śáyīya, śáyāna,
and so on. Other irregularities in its inflection (in part already noticed)
are the 3d pl. persons śérate (AV. etc. have also śére), śératām,
áśerata (RV. has also áśeron), the 3d sing. pres. śáye (R.) and impv.
śáyām. The isolated active form áśayat is common in the older
language; other a-forms, active and middle, occur later.
630. Of the same roots, īḍ and īś insert a union-vowel i before
certain endings: thus, ī́śiṣe, ī́śidhve, ī́ḍiṣva (these three being the only
forms noted in the older language) •, but RV. has ī́kṣe beside īśiṣe; the
ŚvU. has once īśite for īṣṭe. The 3d pl. ī́śire (on account of its
accent) is also apparently present rather than perfect. The MS. has once
the 3d sing. impf, āiśa (like aduha: 635).
239 ROOT-CLAS S (SECOND, ad-CLASS). [—636
631. The roots rud weep, svap sleep, an breathe, and śvas blow
insert a union-vowel i before all the endings beginning with a consonant, except the s and t of 2d and 3d sing, impf,, where they insert
instead either a or ī: thus, svápimi, śvásiṣi, ániti, and ā́nat or
ā́nīt. And in the other forms, the last three are allowed to accent
either root or ending: thus, svápantu and śvásantu (AY.), or
svapántu etc. The AY. has sváptu instead of svápitu.
a. In the older language, √vam makes the same insertions: thus,
vamiti, avamīt; and other cases occasionally occur: thus, jániṣva, vasiṣva
(√vas clothe), śnathihi, stanihi (all RV.), yamiti (JB.), śocimi (MBh,).
On the other hand, √an early makes forms from an a-stem: tjius, ánati
(AV,); pple ánant (ŚB,); opt. anet (AB.).
632. The root brū speak, say (of very frequent use) takes the
union-vowel ī after the root when strengthened, before the initial
consonant of an ending: thus, brávīmi, brávīṣi, brávīti, ábravīs,
ábravīt; but brūmás, brūyā́m, ábravam, ábruvan, etc. Special
occasional irregularities are brūmi, bravīhi, abruvam, abrūvan,
bruyāt, and sporadic forms from an a-stem. The subj. dual brávāite
has been noticed above (615); also the strong forms abravīta,
ábravītana (621a).
633. Some of the roots in u are allowed to be inflected like brū:
namely, ku, tu, ru, and stu; and an occasional instance is met with of
a form so made (in the older language, only tavīti noted; in the later,
only stavīmi, once),
634. The root am (hardly found in the later language) takes ī as
union-vowel: thus, amīṣi (RV.), amīti and āmīt and amīṣva (TS). From
√śam occur śamīṣva (VS.; TS. śamiṣva) and śamīdhvam (TB. etc.).
635. The irregularities of √duh in the older language have been
already in part noted: the 3d pi. indie, mid. duhaté, duhré, and duhráte;
3d sing. impv. duhā́m, pi. duhrā́m and duhratām; impf. act. 3d sing,
áduhat (which is found also in the later language), 3d pi. aduhran
(beside áduhan and duhús); the mid. pple dúghāna; and (quite unexampled elsewhere) the opt. forms duhīyát and duhīyán (RV. only).
The MS. has aduha 3d sing, and aduhra 3d pi. impf, mid., apparently
formed to correspond to the pres. duhe (613) and duhre as adugdha and
aduhata correspond to dugdh eand duhate: compare āiśa (630), related
in like manner to the 3d sing. īśe.
Some of the roots of this class are abbreviated or otherwise
weakened in their weak forms: thus —
636. The root as be loses its vowel in weak forms
(except where protected by combination with the augment).
Its 2d sing, indie, is crfft ási (instead of assi); its 2d sing,
impv. is Trfq* edhí (irregularly from asdhi). The insertion of
686—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 240
^ ī in 2d and 3d sing. impf, has been noticed already
above.
a. The forms of this extremely common verb are, then,
as follows:
Indicative. Optative,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 srfFf F-fīī ~TT Hīīīī R T R HTFT
ásmi svás smás syā́m syā́va syā́ma
2 śrfä īm F ~ FĪĪĪĪT UIM H HTĪĪT
ási sthàs sthá syā́s syā́tam syā́ta
3 3TCT FrTīī HÍtT HTTFT Hīīrnīī HTīī
ásti stás sánti syā́t syā́tām syús
Imperative. Imperfect,
ì ^WIÍH ~TF T "THīī 5TlF-r ~ F T
ásāni ásāva ásāma ā́sam ā́sva ā́sma
2 ś f à F"īī ^ ~ T ^xīī ^ --JTTcT^ –-TīīrT
edhí stám stá ā́sīs ā́stam ā́sta
3 HTīīī^ īī~ ^lHÌrl^ MIWIH ^
3
-TFR^
àstu stā́m sántu ā́sīt ā́stām ā́san
Participle Hr^sánt (fem. ^Tcft satí).
b. Besides the forms of the present-system, there is made from
this root only a perfect, ā́sa etc. (800), of wholly regular inflection.
c. The Vedic subjunctive forms are the usual ones, made upon the
stem ása. They are in frequent use, and appear (asat especially) even
in late texts where the subjunctive is almost lost. The resolution siā́m
etc. (opt) is common in Vedic verse. As 2d and 3d sing. impf, is a few
times met with the more normal ās (for ās-s, ās-t). Sthána, 2d pl,, was
noted above (613).
d. Middle forms from √as are also given by the grammarians as allowed with certain prepositions (vi+ati), but they are not quotable; smahe
and syāmahe (!) occur in the epics, but are merely instances of the ordinary epic confusion of voices (529 a). Confusions of primary and secondary
endings —namely, sva and sma (not rare), and, on the other hand, syāvas
and syāmas — are also epic. A middle present indicative is said to be
compounded (in 1st and 2d persons) with the nomen agentis in tṛ (tar)
to form a periphrastic future in the middle voice (but see below, 947).
The 1st sing, indie is he; the rest is in the usual relation of middle
to active forms (in 2d pers., se, dhve, sva, dhvam, with total loss of
the root itself).
241 ROOT-CLAS S (SECOND, ad-CLASS). [-640
637. The root han smite, slay is treated somewhat after the
manner of noun-stems in an in declension (421): in weak forms, it
loses its n before an initial consonant (except m and v) of a personal
ending (not in the optative), and its a before an initial vowel — and
in the latter case its h, in contact with the n, is changed to gh (compare 402). Thus, for example:
Present Indicative. Imperfect,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 hánmi hanvás hanmàs áhanam áhanva áhanma
2 háṃsi hathás hathá áhan áhatam áhata
3 hànti hatás ghnánti áhan áhatām ághnan
a. Its participle is ghnánt (fem. ghnatī́). Its 2d sing. impv. is
jahí (by anomalous dissimilation, on the model of reduplicating
forms).
b. Middle forms from this root are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, and
those that occur are formed in general according to the same rules: thus,
hate, hanmahe, ghnate; ahata, aghnātām, aghnata (in AB., also
ahata); ghnīta (but also hanīta). Forms from transfer-stems, hana and
ghna, are met with from an early period.
638. The root vaś be eager is in the weak forms regularly and
usually contracted to uś (as in the perfect: 794b): thus, uśmási
(V.: once apparently abbreviated in RY. to śmasi), uśánti; pple
xiśánt, uśāná. Middle forms (except the pple) do not occur; nor do
the weak forms of the imperfect, which are given as āuśva, āuṣṭam, etc.
a. RV. has in like manner the participle uṣāṇ á from the root vas clothe.
639. The root śās order shows some of the peculiarities of a
reduplicated verb, lacking (646) the n before t in all 3d persons pi.
and in the active participle. A part of its active forms — namely,
the weak forms having endings beginning with consonants (including
the optative) — are said to come from a stem with weakened vowel,
śiṣ (as do the aorist, 854, and some of the derivatives); but, excepting the optative (śiṣyām etc., U. S. and later), no such forms are
quotable.
a. The 3d sing. impf, is aśāt (555 a), and the same form is said
to be allowed also as 2d sing. The 2d sing. impv. is śādhí (with total
loss of the s); and RV. has the strong 2d pi. śāstàna (with anomalous
accent); and a-forms, from stem śāsa, occasionally occur.
b. The middle inflection is regular, and the accent (apparently)
always upon the radical syllable (śā́ste, śā́sate, śā́sāna).
c. The root dāś worship has in like manner (RV.) the pple dā́śat
(not dā́śant).
640. The double so-called root jakṣ eat, laugh is an evident reduplication of ghas and has respectively. It has the absence of n in act.
640—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 242
3d persons pl. and pple, and the accent on the root before vowel-endings,
which belong to reduplicated verbs; and it also takes the union-vowel i
in the manner of rud etc. (above, 631). For its forms and derivatives
made with utter loss of the final sibilant, see 233 f.
641. Certain other obviously reduplicated verbs are treated by
the native grammarians as if simple, and referred to this conjugation:
such are the intensively reduplicated jāgṛ (1020 a), daridrā (1024 a),
and vevī (1024 a), dīdhī etc. (676), and cakās (677).
II. Reduplicating Class (third, hu-class).
642. This class forms its present-stem by prefixing a
reduplication to the root.
643. a. As regards the consonant of the reduplication,
the general rules which have already been given above (590)
are followed.
b. A long vowel is shortened in the reduplicating syllable: thus, dadā from √3J da; fsR† bibhī from √Ht bhī;
~~{juhū from hū. The vowel sR" ṛ never appears in the
reduplication, but is replaced by ^ i : thus, f^R bibhṛ from
√H bhṛ; f-TO^pipṛo from √q^pṛc.
c. For verbs in which a and ā also are irregularly represented in the
reduplication by i,see below, 660. Thero ot vṛt (V. B.) makes vavartti
etc.; cakránt (RV.) is very doubtful.
d. The only root of this class with initial vowel is ṛ (or ar);
it takes as reduplication i‚ which is held apart from the root by an
interposed y: thus, iyar and iyṛ (the latter has not been found in
actual use).
644. The present-stem of this class (as of the other
classes belonging to the first or non-a-conjugation) has a
double form: a stronger form, with gunated root-vowel;
and a weaker form, without guṇa: thus, from √~" hu, the
two forms are sfl^t juho and sp~ juhu; from √>ft bhī, they
are f^R bibhe and bibhī. And the rule for their use
is the same as in the other classes of this conjugation: the
strong stem is found before the unaccented endings (552),
and the weak stem before the accented.
243 REDUPLICATING CLASS (THIRD, hU-CLASS). [—647
645. According to all the analogies of the first general conjugation, we should expect to find the accent upon the root-syllable
when this is strengthened. That is actually the case, however, only
in a small minority of the roots composing the class: namely, in hu,
bhī (no test-forms in the older language), hrī (no test-forms found in
the older language), mad (very rare), jan (no forms of this class
found to occur), ci notice (in V.), yu separate (in older language only),
and in bhṛ in the later language (in V. it goes with the majority:
but RV. has bibhárti once, and AV. twice; and this, the later
accentuation, is found also in the Brāhmaṇas); and RV. has once
iyárṣi. In all the rest — apparently, by a recent transfer — it rests
upon the reduplicating instead of upon the radical syllable. And in
both classes alike, the accent is anomalously thrown back upon the
reduplication in those weak forms of which the ending begins with
a vowel; while in the other weak forms it is upon the ending (but
compare 666a).
a. Apparently (the cases with written accent are too few to determine
the point satisfactorily) the middle optative endings, īya etc. (566), are
reckoned throughout as endings with initial vowel, and throw back the
accent upon the reduplication.
646. The verbs of this class lose the ft n in the 3d
pi. endings in active as well as middle, and in the imperfect have 3TĪ us instead of an — and before this a final
radical vowel has guṇa.
1. Present Indicative.
647. The combination of stem and endings is as in
the preceding class.
Example s of inflection: a. y~' hu sacrifice: strong
stem-form, ftj-ŚT juhó; weak form, ft~T juhu (or júhu).
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
l ft^rfft xpr"īī^ -p^ftīī^ 5% pF% pFi%
juhómi juhuvás juhumás júhve juhuváhe juhumáhe
juhóṣi juhuthásjuhuthá juhuṣé júhvāthe juhudhvé
3
f^TÍft p-cf"^ ft^fft jp ^ f^Tft 5^ft
juhóti juhutás júhvati juhuté júhvāte júhvate
647—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 244
b. Root H bhṛ bear (given with Vedic accentuation):
strong stem-form, fspq" bíbhar; weak, Í^J bibhṛ (or bíbhṛ).
bíbharmi bibhṛvás bibhṛmás bíbhre bibhṛváhe bibhṛmáhe
bíbharṣi bibhṛthás bibhṛthá bibhṛṣé bíbhrāthe bibhṛdhvé
bíbharti bibhṛtás bíbhrati bibhṛté bíbhrāte bíbhrate
c. The u of hu (like that of the class-signs nu and u: see below,
697 a) is said to be omissible before v and m of the endings of 1st du.
and pl.: thus, juhvás, juhváhe, etc.; but no such forms are quotable.
2. Present Subjunctive.
648. It is not possible at present to draw a distinct line between
those subjunctive forms of the older language which should be reckoned as
belonging to the present-system and those which should be assigned to the
perfect — or even, in some cases, to the reduplicated aorist and intensive.
Here will be noticed only those which most clearly belong to this class;
the more doubtful cases will be treated under the perfect-system. Except
in first persons (which continue in use as "imperatives" down to the later
language), subjunctives from roots having unmistakably a reduplicated
present-system are of far from frequent occurrence.
649. The subjunctive mode-stem is formed in the usual manner,
with the mode-sign a and guṇa of the root-vowel, if this is capable
of such strengthening. The evidence of the few accented forms met
with indicates that the accent is laid in accordance with that of the
strong indicative forms: thus, from √hu, the stem would be juháva;
from √bhṛ, it would be bíbhara (but bibhára later). Before the
mode-sign, final radical ā would be, in accordance with analogies
elsewhere, dropped: thus, dáda from √dā, dádha from √dhā (all
the forms actually occurring would be derivable from the secondary
roots dad and dadh).
650. Instead of giving a theoretically complete scheme of
inflection, it will be better to note all the examples quotable from
the older language (accented when found so occurring).
a. Thus, of 1st persons, we have in the active juhávāni, bibharāṇi,
dadāni, dadhāni, jahāni; juhavāma, dádhāma, jáhāma; — in the
middle, dadhāi, mimāi; dadhāvahāi; juhavāmahāi, dadāmahe,
dadāmahāi, dadhāmahāi.
b. Of other persons, we have with primary endings in the active
bibharāsi (with double mode-sign: 560 e), dádhathas, juhavātha (do.)
245 REDUPLICATING CLASS (THIRD, hU-CLASS). [—653
and juhavatha; in the middle, dádhase; dádhate, rárate, dádhātāi,
dadātāi; — with secondary endings, dádhas, víveṣas, juhavat, bibharat,
yuyávat, dádhat, dadhánat, babhasat; dadhan, yuyavan, juhavan.
3. Present Optative.
651. To form this mode, the optative endings given
above (566 a), as made up of mode-sign and personal endings,
are added to the unstrengthened stem. The accent is as
already stated (645 a). The inflection is so regular that it is
unnecessary to give here more than the first persons of a
single verb: thus,
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
l prīīF ^ s^nm PNJĪĪR p f a ^srf %
juhuyā́m juhuyā́va juhuyā́ma júhvīya júhvīvahi júhvīmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
4. Present Imperative.
652. The endings, and the mode of their combination
with the root, have been already given. In 2d sing, act.,
the ending is f% hi after a vowel, but ftj dhi after a consonant: ~" hu, however, forms sprfÙ juhudhí (apparently,
in order to avoid the recurrence of ~» h in two successive
syllables): and other examples of jtj dhi after a vowel are
found in the Veda.
653. a. Exampl e of inflection:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i JPRSNFFT ^-H N f^"Tīī § ^ ~"5TTS!% §^-TTq%
juhávāni juhávāva juhávāma juhávāi juhávāvahāi juhávāmohāi
juhudhí juhutám juhutá juhuṣvá júhvāthām juhudhvám
-O O "S o o "S. O "S. O -S.
juhótu juhutā́m júhvatu juhutā́m júhvātām júhvatām
b. The verbs of the other division differ here, asin the indicative,
in the accentuation of their strong forms only: namely, in all the
653—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 246
first persons (borrowed subjunctives), and in the 3d sing. act.: thus,
(in the older language) bíbharāṇi etc., bíbhartu, bíbharāi etc.
654. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the occasional use of
strong forms in 2d persons: thus, yuyodhí, śiśādhi (beside śiśīhí);
yuyotam (beside yuyutám); íyarta, dàdāta and dadātana, dádhāta
and dádhātana (see below, 668), pipartona, juhóta and juhótana,
yuyota and yuyotana; rarāsva (666); 2. the use of dhi instead of
hi after a vowel (only in the two instances just quoted); 3. the ending
tana in 2d pl. act.: namely, besides those just given, in jigātana,
dhattana, mamáttana, vivaktana, didiṣṭana, bibhītana, jujuṣṭana,
juhutana, vavṛttana: the cases are proportionally much more numerous
in this than in any other class; 4. the ending tat in 2d sing, act,, in
dattāt, dhattā́t, pipṛtāt, jahītāt.
5. Present Participle.
655. As elsewhere, the active participle-stem may be
made mechanically from the 3d pl. indic. by dropping ^ i :
thus, sppTJjúhvat,foR-lcT bibhrat. In inflection, it has no
distinction of strong and weak forms (444). The feminine
stem ends in %Rjt atī. The middle participles are regularly
made: thus, sJ–@M júhvana, N^IU! bíbhrāṇa.
a. RV. shows an irregular accent in pipāná (√pā drink).
6. Imperfect.
656. As already pointed out, the 3d pl. act. of this
class takes the ending 3īī^ us, and a final radical vowel has
guṇa before it. The strong forms are, as in present indicative, the three singular active persons.
657. Example s of inflection :
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 Msl-HH, ~pFT -3sT% g§^f % ^HÍ ^
ájuhavam ájuhuva ájuhuma ájuhvi ájuhuvahi ájuhumahi
ájuhos ájuhutam ájuhuta ájuhuthās ájuhvāthām ájuhudhvam
3
SīprrTTīī *Ms^áH^ -~-Tr T ^IHIH ^ -Sf^c T
ájuhot ájuhutām ájuhavus ájuhuta ájuhvātām ájuhvata
247 REDUPLICATING CLASS (THIRD, hU-CLASS). [—663
a. From √H bhṛ, the 2d and 3d sing. act. are -MÍsJH-^
ábibhar (for abibhar-s and abibhar-t) — and so in all other
cases where the strong stem ends in a consonant. The 3d
pi. act. is 5fí«—sH^y ábibharus; and other like cases are
ábibhayus, acikayus, asuṣavus.
b. In MS., once, abibhrus is doubtless a false reading.
658. The usual Vedic irregularities in 2d pi. act. — strong forms,
and the ending tana — occur in this tense also: thus, ádadāta, ádadhāta;
ádattana, ájahātana.' The RV. has also once apiprata for apipṛta
in 3d sing, mid., and abibhran for abibharus in 3d pi. act. Examples
of augmentless forms are śiśās, vivés, jígāt; jíhīta, śíśīta, jihata;
and, with irregular strengthening, yuyoma (AV.), yuyothās, yuyota.
659. The roots that form their present-stem by reduplication
are a very small class, especially in the modern language; they are
only 50, all told, and of these only a third (16) are met with later.
It is, however, very difficult to determine the precise limits of the
class, because of the impossibility (referred to above, under subjunctive:
648) of always distinguishing its forms from those of other reduplicating conjugations and parts of conjugations.
a. Besides the irregularities in tense-inflection already pointed out,
others may be noticed as follows.
Irregularities of the Reduplicating Class.
660. Besides the roots in ṛ or ar — namely, ṛ, ghṛ (usually
written ghar), tṛ, pṛ, bhṛ, sṛ, hṛ, pṛc — the following roots having
a or ā as radical vowel take i instead of a in the reduplicating
syllable: gā go, mā measure, mā bellow, śā, hā remove (mid.), vac,
sac; vaś has both i and a; rā has i once in RY.; for sthā, pā
drink ghrā, han, hi, see below (670—4).
661. Several roots of this class in final ā change the ā in weak
forms to ī (occasionally even to i), and then drop it altogether before
endings beginning with a vowel.
a. This is in close analogy with the treatment of the vowel of the
class-sign of the nā-class: below, 717.
These roots are:
662. śā sharpen, act. and mid.: thus, śiśāti, śiśīmasi, śiśīhí (also
śiśādhi: above, 654), śiśātu, aśiśāt, śíśīte, śíśīta.
663. mā bellow, act, and mā measure, mid. (rarely also act.):
thus, mimāti, mimīyāt; mímīte, mimate, ámimīta; mimīhi,
mímātu. RV. has once mimanti 3d pi. (for mimati).
664—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 248
664. hā remove, mid.: thus, jíhīte, jihīdhve, jíhate; jihīṣva,
jihatām; ájihīta, ajihata. ŚB. hasjihīthām (for jihāthām).
665. hā quit, act. (originally identical with the former), may further
shorten the ī to i : thus, jahāti, jahīta, jahītāt (AV.); jahimas (AV.),
jahitas (TB.), jahitam (TA.), ajahitām (TS. AB.). In the optative,
the radical vowel is lost altogether; thus, johyām, jahyus (AV.). The
2d sing, impv., according to the grammarians, is jahīhi or jahihi or
jahahi; only the first appears quotable.
a. Forms from an a-stem‚ jaha, are made for this root, and even
derivatives from a quasi-root jah.
666. ra give, mid.: thus, rarīdhvam, rarīthas (impf, without
augment); and, with i in reduplication, rirīhi. But AV. has rarāsva.
a. In these verbs, the accent is generally constant on the reduplicating syllable.
667. The two roots dā and dhā (the commonest of the class)
lose their radical vowel altogether in the weak forms, being shortened
to dad and dadh. In 2d sing. impv. act., they form respectively
dehí and dhehi. In combination with a following t or th, the final
dh of dadh does not follow the special rule of combination of a
final sonant aspirate (becoming ddh with the t or th: 160), but —
as also before s and dhv — the more general rules of aspirate and
of surd and sonant combination; and its lost aspiration is thrown
back upon the initial ofthe root (155).
668. The inflection of √dhā is, then, as follows:
Present Indicative.
active. middle,
s. d, p. s. d. p.
1 dádhāmi dadhvás dadhmás dadhé dádhvahe dàdhmahe
2 dádhasi dhatthás dhatthá dhatsé dadhāthe dhaddhve
3 dádhāti dhattás dádhati dhatté dadhā́te dádhate
Present Optative.
l dadhyā́m dadhyā́va dadhyā́ma dádhīya dádhīvahi dádhīmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
Present Imperative.
1 dádhāni dádhāva dádhāma dádhāi dádhāvahāi dádhāmahāi
2 dhehí dhattám dhattà dhatsva dadhāthām dhaddhvam
3 dádhātu dhattā́m dádhatu dhattām dadhātām dadhatām
Imperfect.
1 ádadhām ádadhva ádadhma ádadhi ádadhvahi ádadhmahi
2 ádadhās ádhattam ádhatta ádhatthās ádadhāthām ádhaddhvam
3 ádadhāt ádhattām ádadhus ádhatta ádadhātām ádadhata
249 REDUPLICATING CLASS (THIRD, hU-CLASS). [—676
Participles: act. dàdhat; mid. dádhāna.
a. In the middle (except impf.), only those forms are here accented
for which there is authority in the accentuated texts, as there is discordance
between the actual accent and that which the analogies of the class would
lead us to expect. RV. has once dhátse: dadhé and dadhā́te might be
perfects, so far as the form is concerned. RV. accents dadhītá once
(dádhīta thrice); several other texts have dádhīta, dádhīran, dádīta.
b. The root dā is inflected in precisely the same way, with
change everywhere of (radical) dh to d.
669. The older language has irregularities as follows: 1. the usual
strong forms in 2d pi., dádhāta and ádadhāta, dádāta and ádadāta;
2. the usual tana endings in the same person, dhattona, dádātana, etc.
(654, 658); 3. the 3d sing, indic, act. dadhé (like 1st sing.); 4. the 2d
sing. impv. act. daddhi (for both dehi and dhehi). And R. has dadmi.
670. A number of roots have been transferred from this to the
a- or bhū-class (below, 749), their reduplicated root becoming a
stereotyped stem inflected after the manner of a-stems. These roots
are as follows:
671. In all periods of the language, from the roots sthā stand,
pa drink, and ghrā smell, are made the presents tíṣṭhāmi, píbāmi
(with irregular sonantizing of the second p), and jíghrāmi — which
then are inflected not like mímāmi, but like bhávāmi, as if from
the present-stems tíṣṭha, píba, jíghra.
672. In the Veda (especially; also later), the reduplicated roots dā
and dhā are sometimes turned into the a-stems dáda and dádha, or
inflected as ifroots dad and dadh of the a-class; and single forms of the
same character are made from other roots: thus, mimanti (√mā bellow),
rárate (√rā give: 3d sing. mid.).
673. In the Veda, also, a like secondary stem, jighna, is made from
√han (with omission of the radical vowel, and conversion, usual in this
root, of h to gh when in contact with n: 637); and some of the forms
of saśc, from √sac, show the same conversion to an a-stem, saśca.
674. In AB. (viii. 28), a similar secondary form, jighya, is given to
j/hi or hā: thus, jighyati, jighyatu.
675. A few so-called roots of the first or root-class are the products
of reduplication, more or less obvious: thus, jakṣ (640), and probably
śās (from √śas) and cakṣ (from √kāś or a lost root kas see). In the
Veda is found also saśc, from √sac.
676. The grammarians reckon (as already noticed, 641) several roots
of the most evidently reduplicate character as simple, and belonging to the
root-class. Some of these (jāgṛ, daridrā, vevī) are regular intensive
stems, and will be described below under Intensives (1020a, 1024a);
dīdhī shines together with Vedic dīdī shine and pīpī swell, are sometimes
also classed as intensives; but they have not the proper reduplication of
676—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 250
such, and may perhaps be best noticed here, as reduplicated present-stems
with irregularly long reduplicating vowel.
a. Of pres. indio. occurs in the older language only dīdyati, 3d pl.,
with the pples dī́dyat and dī́dhyat, and mid. dīdye, dīdhye, dīdh¬
yāthām, with the pples dī́dyāna, dī́dhyāna, pī́pyāna. The subj. stems
are dīdáya, dīdhaya, pīpáya, and from them are made forms with both
primary (from dīdáya) and secondary endings (and the irregularly accented
dī́dayat and dīdāyat and dī́dhayan). No opt. occurs. In impv. we have
dīdihí (and didīhí) and pīpihí, and pipyatam, pipyatām, pipyata.
In impf., adīdes and pīpes, ádīdet and ádīdhet and apīpet (with
augmentless forms), apīpema (with strong form of root), and adīdhayus
and (irregular) apīpyan.
b. A few forms from all the three show transfer to an a-inflection:
thus, dīdhaya and pīpaya (impv.), ápīpayat, etc.
c. Similar forms from √mī bellow are amīmet and mīmayat.
677. The stem cakās shine (sometimes cakāś) is also regarded by
the grammarians as a root, and supplied as such with tenses outside the
present-system — which, however, hardly occur in genuine use. It is -not
known in the older language.
678. The root bhas chew loses its radical vowel in weak forms,
taking the form baps: thus, bábhasti, but bápsati (3d pl.), bápsat
(pple). For babdhām, see 233 f.
679. The root bhī fear is allowed by the grammarians to shorten
its vowel in weak forms: thus, bibhīmas or bibhimas, bibhīyām or
bibhiyām; and bibhiyāt etc. are met with in the later language.
680. Forms of this class from √jan give birth, with added i — thus,
jajñiṣe, jajñidhve — are given by the grammarians, but have never
been found in use.
681. The roots ci and cit have in the Veda reversion of c to k in
the root-syllable after the reduplication: thus, cikéṣi, cikéthe (anomalous,
for cikyā́the), cikitām, aciket, cíkyat (pple); cikiddhi.
682. The root vyac has i in the reduplication (from the y), and
is contracted to vie in weak forms: thus, viviktás, áviviktām. So the
root hvar (if its forms are to be reckoned here) has u in reduplication,
and contracts to hur: thus, juhūrthās.
III. Nasal Class (seventh, rudh-class).
683. The roots of this class all end in consonants. And
their class-sign is a nasal preceding the final consonant: in
the weak forms, a nasal simply, adapted in character to the
consonant; but in the strong forms expanded to the syllable
*T ná, which has the accent.
251 NASA L CLAS S (SEVENTH, rudh-CLASS). [—686
a. In a few of the verbs of the class, the nasal extends also into
other tense-systems: they are añj, bhañj, hiṃs: see below, 694.
1. Present Indicative.
684. Example s of inflection : a. the root īīsT^yuj
join: strong stem-form, ERsī yunaj; weak, TF^ yuñj.
For the rules of combination of final j , see 219.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1
oftī-īī p r o n% ~fīī%
yunájmi yuñjvás yuñjmás yuñjé yuñjváhe yuñjmáhe
yunákṣi yuṅkthás yuṅkthá yuṅkṣé yuñjā́the yuṅgdhvé
3
īīftfk –fīī ^ prftr gsrià pīft
yunákti yuṅktás yuñjánti yuùkté yuñjā́te yuñjáte b. the root ~^rud h obstruct; bases ~T:ruṇadh and
^J^rundh.
For rules of combination of final dh, see 153, 160.
i "^īīf^T ^–"J ^ "p- ^ * ^ T "?ül% "p^T %
ruṇádhmi rundhvás rundhmás rundhé rundhváhe rundhmáhe
ruṇátsi runddhás runddhá runtsé rundhā́the runddhvé
3 ""iīífì" "ŚF-IÍH (rMIrt "‡FUcT
ruṇáddhi runddhás rundhánti runddhé rundhā́te rundháte
o. Instead of yuṅkthas, yuṅgdhve, and the like (here and in
the impv. and impf.), it is allowed and more usual (231) to write
yuṅthas, yuṅdhve, etc.; and, in like manner, rundhas, rundhe,
for runddhas, runddhe; and so in other like cases.
685. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the ordinary use of a
3d sing. mid. like the 1st sing., as vṛñje; 2. the accent on té of 3d pi.
mid. in añjaté, indhaté, bhuñjaté.
a. Yunaṅkṣi, in BhP., is doubtless a false reading.
2. Present Subjunctive.
686. The stem is made, as usual, by adding a to the strong
present-stem: thus, yunája, ruṇádha. Below are given as if made
686—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 252
from √yuj all the forms for which examples have been noted as
actually occurring in the older language.
active. middle.
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 yunájāni yunájāva yunájāma yunajāi yunájāmahāi
2 yunájas yunajādhvāi
3 yunájat yunájatas yunájan yunájate
687. The RV. has once añjatas, which is anomalous as being made
from the weak tense-stem. Forms with double mode-sign are met with:
thus, tṛṇáhān (AV.), rādhnávāt and yunajān (ŚB.); and the only
quotable example of 3d du. act. (besides añjatás) is hinásātas (ŚB.),
ŚB. has also hinasāvas as 1st du. act.: an elsewhere unexampled form.
3. Present Optative.
688. The optative is made, as elsewhere, by adding the
compounded mode-endings to the weak form of presentstem. Thus:
4. Present Imperative.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
yuñjyā́m yuñjyā́va yuñjyā́ma yuñjīyá yuñjīváhi yuñjīmáhi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
a. AB. has once the anomalous 1st sing. act. vṛñjīyam. And forms
like bhuñjīyām -yāt, yuñjīyāt, are here and there met with in the
epics (bhuñjīyātām once in 00S.). MBh., too, has once bhuñjītam.
689. In this class (as the roots all end in consonants)
the ending of the 2d sing. act. is always fÊJ dhi.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
yunájāni yunájāva yunájāma yunájāi yunájāvahāi yunájāmahāi
2
33FR-ī - — ^ ĪĪF —5-—F PN~ ^ —
yuṅgdhí yuṅktám yuùktá yuṅkṣvá yuñjā́thām yuṅgdhvám
3
T*W W\ 3
-
3
-
. 3
- -
. 3-~ S
yunáktu yuṅktā́m yuñjántu yuṅktā́m yuñjā́tām yuñjátām
253 NASA L CLAS S (SEVENTH, rudh-CLASs). [—694
690. There is no occurrence, so far as noted, of the ending tat in
verbs of this class. The Veda has, as usual, sometimes strong forms, and
sometimes the ending tana, in the 2d pi. act.: thus, unátta , yunákta ,
anaktana, pinaṣṭana.
5. Present Participle.
691. The participles are made in this class as in the
preceding ones: thus, act. n~(~^yuñjánt (fem. ETacft yuñjatí);
mid. ~ ~ R yuñjāná (but R V. has índhāna).
6. Imperfect.
692. The example of the regular inflection of this tense
needs no introduction:
active. middle.
s. d, p. s. d. p.
áyunajam áyuñjva áyuñjma áyuñji áyuñjvahi áyuñjmah i
áyuna k áyuṅktam áyuṅkt a áyuùkthā s áyuñjāthām áyuṅgdhvam
áyuna k áyuṅktām áyuñja n áyuṅkt a áyuñjātam áyuñjat a
a. The endings s and t are necessarily lost in the nasal class
throughout in 2d and 3d sing, act., unless saved at the expense of the
final radical consonant: which is a case of very rare occurrence (the
only quotable examples were given at 555
693. The Veda shows no irregularities in this tense. Occurrences of
augmentless forms are found, especially in 2d and 3d sing, act., showing
an accent like that of the present: for example, bhinát, pṛṇák, vṛṇák,
piṇák, riṇák.
a. The 1st sing. act. atṛṇam and acchinam (for atṛṇadam and
acchinadam) were noted above, at 555 a. '
694. The roots of this class number about thirty, more than
half of them being found only in the earlier language; no new ones
make their first appearance later. Three of them, añj and bhofij and
hiṃs, carry their nasal also into other tense-systems than the present.
Two, ṛdh and ubh, make present-systems also of other classes having
a nasal in the class-sign: thus, ṛdhnoti (nu-class) and ubhnāti
(nā-class).
694—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 254
a. Many of the roots make forms from secondary a-stems: thus*, from
añja, unda, umbhá, chinda, tṛṃhá, piṃṣa, pṛñcá, bhuñja, rundha,
śiṃṣá, etc.
Irregularities of the Nasal Class.
695. The root tṛh combines tṛṇah with ti, tu, etc into tṛṇeḍhi,
tṛṇéḍhu; and, according to the grammarians, has also such forms as
tmehmi: see above, 224 b.
696. The Toot hiṃs (by origin apparently a desiderative from √han)
accents irregularly the root-syllable in the weak forms: thus, híṃsanti,
híṃste, híṃsāna (but hinásat etc. and hiṃsyā́t ŚB.).
IV. Nu- and u-classes (fifth and eighth, su- and tan-classes).
697. A. The present-stem of the nu-class is made by
adding to the root the syllable ^ nu, which then in the
strong forms receives the accent, and is strengthened to nó.
B. The ign roots of the u-class (about half-a-dozen)
end in *T n, with the exception of the later irregular ^ kṛ
(or kar) — for which, see below, 714. The two classes,
then, are closely correspondent in form; and they are wholly
accordant in inflection.
a. The u of either class-sign is allowed to be dropped before
v and m of the 1st du. and 1st pl. endings, except when the root
(nu-class) ends in a consonant; and the u before a vowel-ending
becomes v or uv, according as it is preceded by one or by two
consonants (129a).
1. Present Indicative.
698. Examples of inflection: A. nu-class; root
H su press out: strong form of stem, g-TT sunó; weak form,
sunu.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 FRTft" WT~ ^ Hi°l-Í W %
sunómi sunuvás sunumás sunvé sunuváhe sunumáhe
2 H-|ÌÍM WWI H^l í WÊ(
sunóṣi sunuthás sunuthá sunusé sunvā́the sunudhvé
255 Nu- AND U- (FIFTH AND EIGHTH, SU- AND tan-CLASSES). [—700
3 HHÌÍcl ĪĪĪĪCTĪĪ īRrfrT īīftft īF-īīft ~^?T
sunóti sunutás sunvánti sunuté sunvā́te sunváte
a. The forms sunvás, sunmás, sunváhe, sunmáhe are altemore common. From √āp, however (for example), only the forms
with u can occur: thus, āpnuvás, āpnumáhe; and also only āpnu¬
vánti, āpnuvé, āpnuváte.
B. u-class; root rpT^tan stretch: strong form of stem,
rFTT tanó; weak, cFT tanu.
i cTTīfīī cF*m^ rF^ cF^% cRl%
tanómi tanvás tanmás tanvé tanváhe tanmáhe
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
b. The inflection is so precisely like that given above that it
is not worth writing out in full. The abbreviated forms in 1st du.
and pi. are presented here, instead of the fuller, which rarely occur
(as no double consonant ever precedes).
699. a. In the older language, no strong 2d persons du. or pi.,
and no thana-endings, chance to occur (but they are numerous in the
impv. and impf.: see below). The RV. has several cases of the irregular
accent in 3d pi. mid.: thus, kṛṇvaté, tanvaté, manvaté, vṛṇvaté,
spṛṇvaté.
b. In RV, occur also several 3d pI. mid. in ire from present-stems
of this class: thus, invire, ṛṇvire, pinvire, śṛṇviré, sunviré, hinviré.
Of these, pinvire and hinviré might be perfects without reduplication
from the secondary roots pinv and hinv (below, 716), The 2d sing. mid.
(with passive value) śṛnviṣé (RV.) is of anomalous and questionable
character.
2. Present Subjunctive.
700. The subjunctive mode-stem is made in the usual manner,
by adding a to the gunated and accented class-sign: thus, sunáva,
tanàva. In the following scheme are given all the forms of which
examples have been met with in actual use in the older language
from either division of the class; some of them are quite numerously
represented there.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 sunávāni sunávāva sunávāma sunávāi sunávāvahāi sunávāmahāi
2 sunávas sunávatha sunávase sunávāithe
3 sunávat sunávan
sunávate
sunávātāi
sunávanta
701---] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 256
701. Of the briefer 1st sing, act., RV. has kṛṇav ā and hinavā .
Forms with double mode-sign occur (not in RV.): thus, kṛṇávā t and
karavā t (AV.); aśnavāth a (K.), kṛṇavāth a (VS.; but -vatha in
Kāṇva-text), karavāth a (ŚB.). On the other hand, aśnavatā i is found
once (in TS.). Forms like āpnuvāni, ardhnúvat, aśnuvat, met with
now and then in the older texts, are doubtless to be regarded as false
readings. RV. has in a single passage kṛṇvāít e (instead of kṛṇávāite);
the only form in āithe is aśnávāithe .
3. Present Optative.
702. The combined endings (566) are added, as usual,
to the weak tense-stem: thus,
4. Present Imperative.
703. The inflection of the imperative is in general like
that in the preceding classes. As regards the 2d sing, act.,
the rule of the later language is that the ending f% hi is
taken whenever the root itself ends in a consonant; otherwise, the tense- (or mode-) stem stands by itself as 2d person (for the earlier usage, see below, 704). An example of
inflection is:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i īī^īfà W^VZ W&TR w‡( Wmī^ īī^Tīī%
sunávān i sunávāv a sunávāma sunávā i sunávāvahā i sunávāmahā i
O O O O "S> oo o o O "S oo •%
sun ú sunutá m sunut á sunuṣvá sunvā́thām sunudhvám
3 FTCTrT ŚFrTPT īī"f" īī"TTīī H^IHI H īī^FTTīī
O O *s o o oo -"s o -\ o -x
sunót u sunutā́m sunvánt u sunutā́m sunvā́tām sunvátām
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i wmm wnm wmm wstn ĪĪ^% ĪĪ-4ÌHÍ^
O O *N O O O O O O O
sunuyā́m sunuyā́va sunuyā́ma sunvīy á sunvīváh i sunvīmáh i
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
a. From √āp, the middle optative would be āpnuvīy á — and
so in other like cases.
257 Nu- A N D U - (FIFTH A N D EIGHTH , S U - A N D tan-) CLASSES. [—706
a. From √āp, the 2d sing. act. would be āpnuhí; from √aś,
aśnuhí; from √dhṛṣ, dhṛṣṇuhí; and so on. From √āp, too, would
be made āpnuvántu, āpnuvā́thām, āpnuvā́tām, āpnuvátām.
704. In the earliest language, the rule as to the omission of hi
after a root with final vowel does not hold good: in RV., such forms as
inuhi, kṛṇuhí, cinuhí, dhūnuhi, śṛṇuhí, spṛṇuhi, hinuhi, and
tanuhi, sanuhi, are nearly thrice as frequent in use as inú, śṛṇu,
sunú, tanu, and their like; in AV,, however, they are only one sixth
as frequent; and in the Brāhmaṇas they appear only sporadically: even
śṛṇudhí (with dhi) occurs several times in RV. RV. has the 1st sing,
act. hinava. The ending tat is found in kṛṇutāt and hinutāt, and
kurutāt. The strong stem-form is found in 2d du. act. in hinotam and
kṛṇotam; and in 2d pi. act. in kṛṇóta and kṛṇótana, śṛṇóta and
śṛṇotana, sunóta and sunótana, hinóta and hinotana, and tanota,
karóta. The ending tana occurs only in the forms just quoted.
5. Present Participle.
705. The endings 5ftH ánt and ETR āná are added to the
weak form of tense stem: thus, from √ïï su come act. FT
sunvánt (fern. W^ft sunvatī́), mid. H ^ M sunvāná; from √~T
tan, rF-Tïï^tanvánt (fern. cF3cfT tanvatī́), cFefH tanvāná. From
>~~ āp, they are MlkMH āpnuvánt and MIM-íM āpnuvāná.
6. Imperfect.
706. The combination of augmented stem and endings
is according to the rules already stated: thus,
active. middle.
s, d. p. s. d. p.
1 yfHTO mm TOf^r TOTO1% 5FRÏÏÍ-F
ásunavam ásunuva ásunuma ásunvi ásunuvahi ásunumohi
2
*IHH!U m*\m mwm m^mw m^m
ásunos ásunutam ásunuta ásunuthās ásunvāthām ásunudhvam
3 STHTH TO"rTTïï Wm Mk\^MW TO“Ff
«0 –N» sM **s O "N- v5J >j -S O
ásunot ásunutām ásunvan ásunuta ásunvātām ásunvata
a. Here, as elsewhere, the briefer forms ásunva, ásunma, ásun¬
vahi, ásunmohi are allowed, and more usual, except from roots
with final consonant, as dhṛṣ: which makes, for example, always
ádhṛṣṇuma etc., and also ádhṛṣṇuvan, ádhṛṣṇuvi, ádhṛṣṇuvāthām,
ádhṛṣṇuvātām, ádhṛṣṇuvata.
707—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 258
707. Strong stem-forms and tana-ending are found only in RV., in
akṛṇota, akṛṇotana. Augmentless forms with accent are minván,
ṛṇutá.
708. About fifty roots make, either exclusively or in part, their
present-forms after the manner of the nu-class: half of them do so
only in the older language; three or four, only in the later.
a. As to transfers to the a-conjugation, see below, 716.
709. The roots of the other division, or of the u-class, are
extremely few, not exceeding eight, even including tṛ on account
of taruté RV., and han on account of the occurrence of hanomi
once in a Sūtra (PGS. i. 3.27). BR. refer the stem inu to in of the
u-class instead of i of the nu-class.
Irregularities of the nu and u-classes.
710. The root tṛp be pleased is said by the grammarians to retain
the n of its class-sign unlingualized in the later language — where,
however, forms of conjugation of this class are very rare; while in the
Veda the regular change is made: thus, tṛ́pṇu.
711. The root śru hear is contracted to śṛ before the classsign, forming śṛṇó and śṛṇu as stem. Its forms śṛṇviṣé and
śṛṇviré have been noted above (699b).
712. The root dhū shake in the later language (and rarely in
B. and S.) shortens its vowel, making the stem-forms 'dhunó and
dhunu (earlier dhūnó, dhūnu).
713. The so-called root ūrṇu, treated by the native grammarians as
dissyllabic and belonging to the root-class (I.), is properly a present-stem
of this class, with anomalous contraction, from the root vṛ (or var). In
the Veda, it has no forms which are not regularly made according to the
nu-class; but in the Brāhmaṇa language are found sometimes such forms
as ūrṇāuti, as if from an u-root of the root class (626); and the grammarians make for it a perfect, aorist, future, etc. Its 2d sing. impv. act.
is ūrṇu or ūrauhi; its impf., āúrṇos, āurṇot; its opt. mid., ūrṇuvīta
(K.) or ūrṇvītá (TS.).
714. The extremely common root SR kṛ (or kar) make
is in the later language inflected in the present-system exclusively according to the u-class (being the only root of
that class not ending in ^ n). It has the irregularity that in
the strong form of stem it (as well as the class-sign) has
the guṇa-strengthening, and that in the weak form it is
259 Nu- AND U- (FIFTH AND EIGHTH, SU- AND tan-) CLASSES. [—714
changed to kur, so that the two forms of stem are karó
and ~ ~ kuru. The class-sign 3 u is always dropped before 5f v and ft m of the 1st du. and pi., and also before
TJ^y of the opt. act. Thus:
1. Present Indicative.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i 3T7tfft -fi-íīī -fiftīī -tfft -fiôpà 3Fíft%
karómi kurvás kurmás kurve kurváhe kurmáhe
karóṣi kuruthás kuruthá kuruṣé kurvā́the kurudhvé
3
4Ì[ÌÍH 5TpTīī ^ Jftfft gTŚft 5^Tft gi^ft
karóti kurutás kurvánti kuruté kurvā́te kurváte
2. Present Optative.
1 -TOTft -fift“Tft W f -fi-ifcr ch-4ÌNÍ-6 ^fīī%
O *S O O O O O
kuryā́m kuryā́va kuryā́ma kurvīyá kurvīváhi kurvīmáhi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
3. Present Imperative.
1 ^IÍU 1 ZK^m ~"~ft ~"TT^% ^Tft %
karávāṇi karávāva karávāma karávāi karávāvahāi karávāmahāi
2 3-5 •—r - ~ -jf ^
kurú kurutám kurutá kuruṣvá kurvā́thām kurudhvám
karótu kurutā́m kurvántu kurutám kurvā́tām kurvátām
4. Present Participle.
kurvánt (fem. Sfi-Ícft kurvatī́) chcf|U| kurvāṇá
5. Imperfect.
1 y+(o|^ -3ftpf mjR QRjffi M^i4í^ y+HÍ-fc
ákaravam ákurva ákurma ákurvi ákurvahi ákurmohi
2
3JFF^ 3f"ŚcT «*^j8ll^4IJTicflī4ll^ --^f^w
ákaros ákurutam ákuruta ákuruthās ákurvāthām ákurudhvam
3
^frd!H^ 3fti^ *-íf"Śft -MJeílHI^ "fsfft
ákarot ákurutām ákurvan ákuruta ákurvātām ákurvata
715—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 260
715. In RV., this root is regularly inflected in the present-system
according to the nu-class, making the stem-forms kṛṇó and kṛnu; the
only exceptions are kurmas once and kuru twice (all in the tenth book) •‚
in AV., the nu-forms are still more than six times as frequent as the
u-forms (nearly half of which, moreover, are in prose passages); but in
the Brāhmaṇa language and later, the u-forms are used to the exclusion
of the others.
a. As 1st sing. pres. act. is found kurmi in the epos.
b. What irregular forms from kṛ as a verb of the nu-class occur in
the older language have been already noticed above.
c. The isolated form taruté, from √tṛ, shows an apparent analogy
with these u-forms from kṛ.
716. A few verbs belonging originally to these classes have
been shifted, in part or altogether, to the a-class, their proper
class-sign having been stereotyped as a part of the root.
a. Thus, in RV. we find forms both from the stem inu (√i or in),
and also from inva, representing a derivative quasi-root inv (and these
latter alone occur in AV.). So likewise forms from a stem ṛnva beside
those from ṛṇu (√ṛ); and from hinva beside those from hinu (√hi).
The so-called roots jinv and pinv are doubtless of the same origin, although
no forms from the stem pinu are met with at any period — unless pinvire
(above, 699b) be so regarded; and AV. has the participle pinvánt, f.
pinvatī́. The grammarians set up a root dhinv, but only forms from
dhi (stem dhinu) appear to occur in the present-system (the aorist
adhinvīt is found in PB.).
b. Occasional a-forms are met with also from other roots: thus,
cinvata etc., dunvasva.
V. Nā-class (ninth or krī-class).
717. The class-sign of this class is in the strong forms
the syllable ~ nā, accented, which is added to the root;
in the weak forms, or where the accent falls upon the ending, it is *fì" nī; but before the initial vowel of an ending
the ^ ī of ^ft nx disappears altogether.
1. Present Indicative.
718. Example of inflection: root sRi" krī buy: strong
form of stem, gffrīīT krīṇā́; weak form, gftníì krīṇī (before
a vowel, Wtīīī krīṇ).
261 Nā-CLASS (NINTH, krī-CLASS). [—722
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 śhluilÍH *lulìoi^ ŚH1UĪÌHH, Ä ^FHRX^ 9hìUĪÌH^
krīṇā́mi krīṇīvás krīṇīmás krīṇé krīṇīváhe krīṇīmáhe
2
9h1uníù 5hluNy^ ^fnm -
ŚH1UÍFÔ é n i ^ĪĪĪĪS
krīṇā́si krīṇīthás krīṇīthá krīṇīṣé krīṇā́the krīṇīdhvé
3 Wtmn 5hìUÍÌd^ Wif e shkíìcì 9h1uiÍH 5hlUlirì
krīṇā́ti krīṇītás krīṇánti krīṇīté krīṇā́te krīṇáte
719. In the Veda, the 3d sing. mid. has the same form with the 1st
in gṛṇé; the peculiar accent of 3d pi. mid. is seen in punaté and riṇaté;
and vṛṇīmahé (beside vṛṇīmáhe) occurs once in RV.
2. Present Subjunctive.
720. The subjunctive forms which have been found exemplified
in Veda and Brāhmaṇa are given below. The subjunctive mode-stem
is, of course, indistinguishable in form from the strong tense-stem.
And the 2d and 3d sing. act. (with secondary endings) are indistinguishable from augmentless imperfects.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 krīṇāni krīṇama krīṇāí krīṇāvahāi krīṇāmahāi
2 krīṇas krīṇātha krīṇāsāi
3 krīṇā́t krīṇā́n krīṇātāi krīṇāntāi
3. Present Optative.
721. This mode is formed and inflected with entire
regularity; owing to the fusion of tense-sign and mode-sign
in the middle, some of its persons are indistinguishable from
augmentless imperfects. Its first persons are as follows:
active. middle.
s. d. p. s. d. p.
'^1UFKLL^ Äfa“ f shluíì-JIH A T sh1uílcjf-fc 5h1uīÌHÍ^
krīṇīyā́m krīṇīyā́va krīṇīyā́ma krīṇīyá krīṇīváhi krīṇīmáhi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
4. Present Imperative.
722. The ending in 2d sing, act., as being always preceded by a vowel, is f% hi (never ftf dhi); and there are no
examples of an omission of it. But this person is forbidden
722—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 262
to be formed in the classical language from roots ending in
a consonant; for both class-sign and ending is substituted
the peculiar ending 5TR āná.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i stOuilfi shìUIM sīītWT xffffií chl-lIM^ shlüHH^
krīṇā́ni krīṇā́va krīṇā́ma krīṇāí krīṇā́vahāi krīṇā́mahāi
krīṇīhí krīṇītám krīṇītà krīṇīṣvá krīṇathām krīṇīdhvám
3
5hÌUIÌHI^ sh1uíÌHIH^5hlmidlH^ ^ÌUIHH^
krīṇā́tu krīṇītā́m krīṇàntu krīṇītā́m krīṇā́tām krmátām
a. Examples of the ending āná in 2d sing. act. are aśāna,
gṛhāṇá, badhāná, stabhāná.
723. The ending āna is known also to the earliest language; of the
examples just given, all are found in AV., and the first two in RV.; others
are iṣāṇa, muṣāṇa, skabhāna. But AV. has also gṛbhṇīhi (also AB.),
and even gṛhṇāhi, with strong stem; BhP. has badhnīhi. Strong stems
are further found in gṛṇāhi and stṛṇāhi (TS.), pṛṇāhi (TB.), and
śrīṇāhi (Āpast.), and, with anomalous accent, punāhí and śṛṇāhí (SV.);
and, in 2d pl. act., in punā́ta (RV.). The ending tat of 2d sing. act.
occurs in gṛhṇītāt, jānītā́t, punītāt. The ending tana is found in
punītána, pṛṇītana, śrīṇītana.
5. Present Participle.
724. The participles are regularly formed: thus, for
example, act. 5hìUlrj^ krīṇánt (fem. 5hìuiríì krīṇatí); mid.
sh1ülH krīṇāná.
6. Imperfect.
725. There is nothing special to be noted as to the
inflection of this tense: an example is —
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 -4sh1UII^ Msh1uil°l Malaiin -Mshlfftl -M9h1uiì^Ì^ MghìUÍÌHÌ^
ákrīṇām ákrīṇīva ákrīṇīma ákrīṇi ákrīṇīvahi ákrīṇīmahi
2 tlch1mW ^ghìüfíHM M^ÌUÍÌH -M^1un^mMgh1UIMIH «5h1lííÌHīī
-V. *S "*N 'S
àkrīṇās ákrīṇītam ákrīṇīta ákrīṇīthās ákrīnāthām ákrīṇīdhvam
ákrīṇāt ákrīṇītām ákrīṇan ákrīṇīta ákrīṇātām ákrīṇata
263 N"ā-CLASS (NINTH, krī-CLASS). [—732
726. It has been pointed out above that augmentless persons of this
tense are in part indistinguishable in form from subjunctive and optative
persons. Such as certainly belong here are (in V.) kṣiṇām; aśnan,
riṇán; gṛbhṇata, vṛṇata. The AV. has once minīt instead of mināt.
MBh. has aśnīs after mā.
a. AB. has the false form ajānīmas, and in AA. occurs avṛṇīta as
3d plural.
727. The roots which form their present-systems, wholly or in
part, after the manner of this class, are over fifty in number: but, for
about three fifths of them, the forms are quotable only from the older
language, and for half-a-dozen they make their first appearance later;
for less than twenty are they in use through the whole life of the
language, from the Veda down.
a. As to secondary a-stems, see 731.
Irregularities of the nā-class.
728. a. The roots ending in ū shorten that vowel before the
class-sign: thus, from √pū, punā́ti and punīté; in like manner also
jū, dhū, lū.
b. The root vlī (B.S.) forms either vlīnā or vlinā.
729. The root grabh or grah (the former Vedic) is weakened
to gṛbh or gṛh.
a. As the perfect also in weak forms has gṛbh or gṛh, it is not
easy to see why the grammarians should not have written ṛ instead of ra
in the root.
730. a. A few of the roots have a more or less persistent
nasal in forms outside the present-system; such are without nasal
before the class-sign: thus, grath or granth, badh or bandh, math
or manth, skabh or skambh, stabh or stambh.
b. The root jña also loses its nasal before the class-sign: thus,
jānā́ti, jānīté.
731. Not rarely, forms showing a transfer to the a-conjugation
are met with: thus, even in RV., minati, minat, aminanta, from
√mi; in AV., śṛṇa from √śṛ; later, gṛhṇa, jāna, prīṇa, mathna,
etc. And from roots pṛ and mṛ are formed the stems pṛṇá and
mṛṇá, which are inflected after the manner of the á-class, as if from
roots pṛṇ and mṛṇ.
732. In the Veda, an apparently denominative inflection of a
stem in āyá is not infrequent beside the conjugation of roots of this
class: thus, gṛbhāyá, mathāyáti, aśrathāyas, skabhāyáta, astabh¬
āyat, pruṣāyánte, muṣāyát, and so on. See below, 1066 b.
733—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 264
Second or a-Conjugation.
733. We come now to the classes which compose the
Second or a-Conjugation. These are more markedly
similar in their mode of inflection than the preceding classes;
their common characteristics, already stated, may be here
repeated in summary. They are: 1. A final a in the presentstem; 2. a constant accent, not changing between stem and
ending; 3. a briefer form of the optative mode-sign in the
active, namely ī instead of yā (combining in both voices
alike with a to e); 4. the absence of any ending (except
when tat is used) in 2d sing. impv. act.; 5. the conversion
of initial ā of the 2d and 3d du. mid. endings to e; 6. the
use of the full endings ante, anta, antām in 3d pI. mid.
forms; 7. the invariable use of an (not us) in 3d pi. impf,
act.; 8. and the use of māna instead of āna as ending of the
mid. pple. Moreover, 9. the stem-final a becomes ā before
m and v of 1st personal endings — but not before am of
1st sing. impf.: here, as before the 3d pi. endings, the
stem-final is lost, and the short a of the ending remains
(or the contrary): thus, bhávanti (bháva+-anti), bhávante
(bháva + ante), ábhavam (ábhava-+am).
a. All these characteristics belong not to the inflection of the
a-present-systems alone, but also to that of the a-, reduplicated, and
sa-aorists, the s-future, and the desiderative, causative, and denominative present-systems. That is to say, wherever in conjugation an
a-stem is found, it is inflected in the same manner.
VI. A-class (first, bhu-class).
734. The present-stem of this class is made by adding
5[ a to the root, which has the accent, and, when that is
possible (235, 240), is strengthened to guṇa. Thus, H5f
bháva from √T bhū; 3RJ jáya from √% j i; ^fa bódha from
yWJ budh; ftq sárpa from √TR sṛp; — but 5R* váda from
vad; śfftl krí<Ja from √5FÌ3 krīcj.
265 A-CLASS (FIRST, bhŪ-CLASS). [—737
1. Present Indicative.
735. The endings and the rules for their combination
with the stem have been already fully given, for this and
the other parts of the present-system; and it only remains
to illustrate them by examples.
a. Exampl e of inflection: root ^bh ū bey stem
bháva (bho-t-a: 131).
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
-Wrfīī H^l^H ^ H^IHH ^ --R H-TT-T% W T %
bhávāmi bhávāva s bhávāma s bháv e bhávāvah e bhávāmah e
H^TTT ī -r~T H3īī
bhávasi bhávatha s bhávath a bhávas e bháveth e bhávadhv e
^T-TÌH WJ"īī ^T3"M -^tf H3"īī
bhávati bhávata s bhávanti bhávat e bhávet e bhávant e
b. The V. has but a single example of the thana-ending, namely
vádathan a (and no other in any class of this conjugation). The 1st pl.
mid. manāmah é (RV., once) is probably an error. RV. has śóbhe once
as 3d singular.
2. Present Subjunctive.
736. The mode-stem is bhávā (bháva+a). Subjunctive forms
of this conjugation are very numerous in the older language; the
following scheme instances all that have been found to occur.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1
2
3
bhávān i
bhávāsi
bhávā s
bhávāti
bhávā t
bhávav a bhávāma bhávā i bhávāvahā i bhávāmahā i
bhàvātha s bhàvāth a
bhávāta s bhávā n
bhàvās e
bhàvāsā i
bhávāt e
bhávātā i
bhávāit e
bhávadhvā i
bhávant a
bhávāntā i
737. The 2d du. mid. (bhávāithe ) does not chance to occur in this
class; and yátāit e is the only example of the 3d person. No such pl.
mid. forms as bhávādhve , bhávānt e are made from any class with stemfinal a ; such as bhávant a (which are very common) are, of course, properly augmentless imperfects. The Brāhmaṇas (especially ŚB.) prefer the
2d sing. act. in āsi and the 3d in at. AB. has the 3d sing. mid. hara¬
tāi; and a 3d pl. in antāi (vartantāi KB.) has been noted once. RV.
has examples, area and madā , of the briefer 1st. sing. act.
738—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM.
3. Present Optative.
738. The scheme of optative endings as combined with
the final of an a-stem was given in full above (566).
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
bháveyam bháveva bhàvema bháveya bhávevahi bhávemahi
bhàves bhávetam bháveta bhávethās bháveyāthām bhávedhvam
bhávet bhávetām bháveyus bháveta bháveyātām bháveran
a. The RV. has once the 3d pi. mid. bharerata (for one other
example, see 752b). AV. has udeyam from √vad.
b. A few instances are met with of middle 3d persons from a-stems
in īta and (very rarely) īran, instead of eta and eran. For convenience,
they may be put together here (excepting the more numerous causative
forms, for which see 1043c); they are (so far as noted) these: nayīta S.
and later, śoṃsīta S., śrayīta S.; dhayīta S., dhyāyīta U., hvayīta
AB. S. and hvayīron S., dhmāyīta U. An active form śaṃsīyāt C.
is isolated and anomalous.
4. Present Imperative.
739. An example of the imperative inflection is:
active. middle,
s. d. p. Í. d. p.
bhávāni bhávāva bhávāma bhávāi bhávāvohāi bhávāmohāi
bháva bhávatam bhávata bhávasva bhàvethām bhàvadhvam
bhávatu bhávatām bhávantu bhávatām bhávetām bhàvantām
740. The ending tana in 2d pi. act. is as rare in this whole conjugation as is thana in the present: the V. affords only bhajatana in the
a-class (and nahyatona in the ya-class: 760 c). The ending tat of 2d
sing, act., on the other hand, is not rare; the RV. has avatāt, oṣatāt,
dahatāt, bhavatāt, yacchatāt, yācatāt, rákṣatāt, vahatāt; to which
AV. adds jinvatāt, dhāvatāt; and the Brāhmaṇas bring other examples.
MS. has twice svadātu (parallel texts both times svadāti): compare
similar cases in the á-class: 752 c.
266
267 A-CLASS (FIRST, bhŪ-CLASS). [—744
5. Present Participle.
741. The endings EFT^ant and ~R māna are added to
the present-stem, with loss, before the former, of the final
stem-vowel: thus, act. --RrT bhávant (fem. H^frft bhávantī);
mid. H--HH bhavamāna.
a. A small number of middle participles appear to be made from
stems of this class (as of other a-classes: see 752 e, 1043f) by the
suffix āna instead of māna: thus, namāna, pacāna, śikṣāṇa, sva¬
jāna, hvayāna (all epic), majjāna and kaṣāṇa (later); and there are
Vedic examples (as cyávāna, prathāná, yátāna or yatāná, śúmbhāna,
all RV.) of which the character, whether present or aorist, is doubtful:
compare 840, 852.
6. Imperfect.
742. An example of the imperfect inflection is:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
ábhavam ábhavāva ábhavāma ábhave ábhavāvahi ábhavāmohi
TOÍ *-PRcFf T 3Wiīīī 3WÍFf 5R"sR
ábhavas ábhavatam ábhavata ábhavathās ábhavethām ábhavadhvam
ábhavat ábhavatām ábhavan ábhavata ábhavetām àbhavanta
743. No forms in tana are made in this tense from any a–class.
Examples of augmentless forms (which are not uncommon) are: cyávam,
ávas, dáhas, bódhat, bhárat, cáran, náśan; bādhathās, várdhata,
śócanta. The subjunctively used forms of 2d and 3d sing. act. are more
frequent than those of either of the proper subjunctive persons.
744. A far larger number of roots form their present-system
according to the a-class than according to any of the other classes:
in the RV., they are about two hundred and forty (nearly two fifths
of the whole body of roots); in the AV., about two hundred (nearly
the same proportion); for the whole language, the proportion is still
larger, or nearly one half the whole number of present-stems: namely,
over two hundred in both earlier and later language, one hundred
and seventy-five in the older alone, nearly a hundred and fifty in
the later alone. Among these are not a few transfers from the classes of the first conjugation: see those classes above. There are no
roots ending in long ā — except a few which make an a-stem in
some anomalous way: below, 749a.
745—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 268
Irregularities of the a-class.
745. A few verbs have irregular vowel-changes in forming the
present-stem: thus,
á. ūh consider has guṇa-strengthening (against 240): thus, óhate.
b. kṛp (or krap) lament, on the contrary, remains unchanged: thus,
kṛ́pate.
c. guh hide has prolongation instead of guṇa: thus, gū́hati.
d. kram stride regularly lengthens its vowel in the active, but not
in the middle: thus, krā́mati, krámate; but the vowel-quantities are
somewhat mixed up, even from the oldest language down; — klam tire is
said to form klāmati etc., but is not quotable; — cam with the preposition ā rinse the mouth forms ā́cāmati.
e. In the later language are found occasional forms of this class from
mṛj wipe; and they show the same vṛddhi (instead of guṇa) which belongs
to the root in its more proper inflection (627): thus, mārjasva.
f. The grammarians give a number of roots in urv, which they declare to lengthen the u in the present-stem. Only three are found in (quite
limited) use, and they show no forms anywhere with short u. All appear
to be of secondary formation from roots in ṛ or ar. The root murch or
mūrch coagulate has likewise only ū in quotable forms.
g. The onomatopoetic root ṣṭhīv spew is written by the grammarians
as ṣṭhiv, and declared to lengthen its vowel in the present-system: compare 240 b.
746. The roots daṃś bite, rañj color, sañj hang, svañj embrace,
of which the nasal is in other parts of the conjugation not constant,
lose it in the present-system: thus, dáśati etc.; sañj forms both
sajati and sajjati (probably for sajyati, or for sasjati from sasa¬
jati); math or month has mathati later. In general, as the present
of this class is a strengthening formation, a root that has such a
nasal anywhere has it here also.
747. The roots gam go and yam reach make the present-stems
gàccha and yáccha: thus, gàcchāmi etc.: see 608.
748. The root sad sit forms sī́da (conjectured to be contracted
from sisda for sisada): thus, sī́dāmi etc.
749. Transfers to this class from other classes are not rare, as
has been already pointed out above, both throughout the present-system and in occasional forms. The most important cases are the
following :
a. The roots in ā, sthā stand, pā drink, and ghrā smell, form
the present-stems tíṣṭha (tíṣṭhāmi etc.), píba (píbāmi etc.), and
jíghra (jíghrāmi etc.): for these and other similar cases, see 671—4.
b. Secondary root-forms like inv, jinv, pinv, from simpler roots
269 ACCENTED á-CLASS (SIXTH, tud-CLASS). [—752
of the nu-class, are either found alongside their originals, or have
crowded these out of use: see 716.
750. On the other hand, the root dham or dhmā blow forms
its present-stem from the more original form of the root: thus,
dhámati etc.
VII. Accented á-class (sixth, tud-class).
751. The present-stem of this class has the accent on
the class-sign ET á, and the root remains unstrengthened. In
its whole inflection, it follows so closely the model of the
preceding class that to give the paradigm in full will be
unnecessary (only for the subjunctive, all the forms found
to occur will be instanced).
752. Example of inflection: root fsp-Tjvic enter; stem
fêP-tí viśá:
1. Present Indicative.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i fà-Tft fàww^ f-rora* íircf faüim-fe
viśā́mi viśā́vas viśā́mas viśé viśā́vahe viśā́mahe
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
1
2
3
2. Present Subjunctive,
viśā́va viśā́ma viśāí viśā́vahāi viśā́mahāi
viśā́tha
viśā́tas viśā́n
a. A single example of the briefer 1st sing. act. is mṛkṣa. The
only forms in āithe and āite are pṛṇāíthe and yuvāíte.
viśéyam viśéva viśéma viśéya viśévahi viśémahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
b. The RV. has the ending tana once in tiretana 2d pl. act., and
rata in juṣerata 3d pl. mid.
viśā́ni
viśā́si
yiśā́s
viśā́ti
viśā́t
viśā́se
viśā́sāi
viśā́te
viśā́tāi
viśāíthe
viśāíte viśā́ntāi
752—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 270
4. Present Imperative.
The first persons having been given above as subjunctives, the second are added here:
2 fast f%5īft\ f w r īm&( ÍÄJIH ^ fàwr^
viśá viśátam viśáta viśásva viśéthām viśádhvam
etc etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
c. The ending tat is found in RV. and AV. in mṛḍatāt, vṛhatāt,
suvatāt; other examples are not infrequent in the Brāhmaṇa language:
thus, khidatāt, chyatāt, pṛcchatāt, viśatāt, sṛjatāt; and later, spṛśa¬
tāt. The 3d sing. act. nudātu and muñcātu occur in Sūtras (cf. 740).
5. Present Participle.
The active participle is fêfê"ĪT^ viśánt; the middle is
feftlHM viśámāna.
d. The feminine of the active participle is usually made from the
strong stem-form: thus, viśántī; but sometimes from the weak: thus,
siñcántī and siñcatī́ (RV. and AV.), tudántī and tudatī (AV,): see
above, 449 d,e.
e. Middle participles in āna instead of māna are dhuvāná,
dhṛṣāṇá, liśāna, śyāna, in the older language; kṛśāna, muñcāna,
spṛśāna in the later (cf. 741 a).
6. Imperfect.
ì srfwr^ «fa«tiM -yfawin ufemwfy ÄīFri %
áviśam áviśāva áviśāma áviśe áviśāvahi áviśāmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
f. Examples of augmentless forms accented are sṛjás, sṛját, tiránta.
g. The a-aorist (846 ff.) is in general the equivalent, as regards its
forms, of an imperfect of this class.
753. Stems of the á-class are made from nearly a hundred and
fifty roots: for about a third of these, in both the earlier and the
later language; for a half, in the earlier only; for the remainder,
nearly twenty, only in the later language. Among them are a number of transfers from the classes of the non-a-conjugation.
a. In some of these transfers, as pṛṇ and mṛṇ (731), there takes
place almost a setting-up of independent roots.
b. The stems icchá, ucchá, and ṛcchá are reckoned as belonging
respectively to the roots is desire, vas shine, and ṛ go.
c. The roots written by the Hindu grammarians with final o —
namely, cho‚ do, śo, and so — and forming the present-stems chyá,
271 ACCENTE D á-CLASS (SIXTH, tud-CLASS). [—759
dyá, śyá, syá, are more properly (as having an accented á in the stem)
to be reckoned to this class than to the ya-class, where the native classification puts them (see 761 g). They appear to be analogous with the
stems kṣya, sva, hva, noted below (755).
754. The roots from which á-stems are made have certain noticeable
peculiarities of form. Hardly any of them have long vowels, and none have
long interior vowels; very few have final vowels; and none (save two or
three transfers, and √lajj be ashamed, which does not occur in any accentuated text, and is perhaps to be referred rather to the a-class) have a as
radical vowel, except as this forms a combination with r, which is then
reduced with it to ṛ or some of the usual substitutes of ṛ.
Irregularities of the á-class.
755. The roots in i and u and ū change those vowels into iy
and uv before the class-sign: thus, kṣiyá, yuvá, ruvá; suvá, etc.;
and sva, hva occur, instead of suva and huva, in the older language,
while TS. has the participle kṣyánt. K. has dhūva from √dhū.
756. The three roots in ṛ form the present-stems kirá, girá
(also gila), tirá, and are sometimes written as kir etc.; and gur, jur,
tur are really only varieties of gṛ, jṛ, tṛ; and bhur and sphur are
evidently related with other ar or ṛ root-forms.
a. The common root prach askmakes the stem pṛcchá.
757. As to the stems -driyá and -priya, and mriyá and dhriyá,
sometimes reckoned as belonging to this class, see below, 773.
758. Although the present-stem of this class shows in general
a weak form of the root, there are nevertheless a number of roots
belonging to it which are strengthened by a penultimate nasal. Thus,
the stem muñcá is made from √muc release; siñcá from √sic sprinkle; vindá from √vidj*nd; kṛntá from √kṛt cut; piṃśá from √piś
adorn; tṛmpá from √tṛp enjoy; lumpá from √lup break; limpá from
√lip smear; and occasional forms of the same kind are met with from
a few others, as tunda from √tud thrust; bṛṃhá from √bṛh strengthen; dṛṃhá (beside dṛ́ṃha) from √dṛh make ßrm; śumbhá (beside
śúmbha) from √śubh shine; TS. has śṛnthati from √śrath (instead
of śrathnāti); uñcha, vindhá, sumbha, are of doubtful character.
a. Nasalized á-stems are also in several instances made by transfer
from the nasal class: thus, unda, umbha, ṛñjá, piṃṣá, yuñja, run¬
dha, śiṃṣa.
VIII. Ya-class (fourth, div-class).
759. The present-stem of this class adds U ya to the
accented but unstrengthened root. Its inflection is also pre-
759—] I X . PRESENT-SYSTEM . 2 7 2
i
2
3
a. A 3d pi. mid. in antāi (jāyantāi) occurs once in TS.
3. Present Optative.
náhyeyam náhyeva náhyema náhyeya náhyevahi náhyemahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
b. For two or three 3d sing. mid. forms in īta (for eta), see 738 b.
4 . Present Imperative.
2 ~ ~ H^rW^ H ft~T~f H^S4IH^ ft"J-Jīī
náhya náhyatam náhyata náhyasva náhyethām náhyadhvam
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
c. Of the ending tana, RV. has one example, nahyatana; the
ending tat is found in asyatāt, khyāyatāt, naśyatāt.
5. Present Participle.
The active participle is rT^náhyant (fem. H^TÍÌ náh¬
yantī); the middle is nahyamSna.
6. Imperfect.
i 5R—T^ MH-MN TOTR 3RWTSTÍ% MH^HÍ^
ánahyom ánahyāva ánohyāma ánahye ánohyāvahi ánahyāmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
náhyāni
náhyāsi
náhyās
náhyāti
náhyāt
náhyāma náhyāl náhyāvahāi náhyāmohāi
náhyāsāi nàhyādhvāi
náhyātas náhyān náhyātāi náhyāntāi
cisely like that of the a-class, and may be presented in the
same abbreviated form as that of the a-class.
760. Exampl e of inflection : root -"g nah bind;
stem ft^T nahya.
1. Present Indicative.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
náhyāmi nàhyāvas náhyāmas nàhye nàhyāvahe nàhyāmahe
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
273 Ya-CLASS (FOURTH, div-CLASS). [—761
d. Examples of augmentless forms showing the accent belonging to the
present-system are gā́yat, páśyat, páśyan, jā́yathās.
761. The ya-class stems are more than a hundred and thirty in
number, and nearly half of them have forms in use in all periods of
the language, about forty occurring only in the earlier, and about
thirty only in the modern period.
a. Of the roots making ya-stems, a very considerable part (over fifty)
signify a state of feeling, or a condition of mind or body: thus, kup be
angry, klam be weary, kṣudh be hungry, muh be confused, lubh be lustful, śuṣ be dry, etc. etc.
b. A further number have a more or less distinctly passive sense,
and are in part evident and in part presumable transfers from the passive
or yá-class, with change of accent, and sometimes also with assumption of
active endings. It is not possible to draw precisely the limits of the division ; but there are in the older language a number of clear cases, in which
the accent wavers and changes, and the others are to be judged by analogy
with them. Thus, √muc forms múcyate once or twice, beside the usual
mucyáte, in RV. and AV.; and in the Brāhmaṇas the former is the
regular accent. Similar changes are found also in ya-forms from other
roots: thus, from kṣi destroy, jī or jyā injure, tap heat, dṛh make firm,
pac cook, pṛ fill, mī damage, ric leave, lup break, hā leave. Active
forms are early made from some of these, and they grow more common
later. It is worthy ofspecial mention that, from the Veda down, jā́yate is
born etc. is found as altered passive or original ya-formation by the side
of √jan give birth.
c. A considerable body of roots (about forty) differ from the above in
having an apparently original transitive or neuter meaning: examples are
as throw, nah bind, paś see, pad go, śliṣ clasp.
d. A number of roots, of various meaning, and of somewhat doubtful character and relations, having present-stems ending in ya, are by the
native grammarians written with final diphthongs, āi or e or o. Thus:
e. Roots reckoned as ending in āi and belonging to the a- (or bhū-)
class, as gāi sing (gā́yati etc.). As these show abundantly, and for the
most part exclusively, ā-forms outside the present-system, there seems to
be no good reason why they should not rather be regarded as ā-roots of
the ya-class. They are kṣā burn, gā sing, glā be weary, trā save, dhyā
think, pyā fill up, mlā relax, rā bark, vā be blown, śyā coagulate, śrā
boil, styā stiffen. Some of them are evident extensions of simpler roots
by the addition of ā. The secondary roots tāy stretch (beside tan), and
cāy observe (beside ci) appear to be of similar character.
f. Roots reckoned as ending in e and belonging to the a- (or bhū-)
class, as dhe suck (dháyati etc.). These, too, have ā-forms, and sometimes ī-forms, outside the present system, and are best regarded as ā-roots,
either with ā weakened to a before the class-sign of this class, or with ā
761—] I X . PRESENT-SYSTEM . 274
weakened to ī or i and inflected according to the a-class. They are dhā
suck, mā exchange, vā weave, vyā envelop, hvā call (secondary, from
hū). As of kindred form may be mentioned day share and vyay expend
(probably denominative of vyaya).
g. A few roots artificially written with final o and reckoned to the
ya-class, with radical vowel lost before the class-sign: thus, do cut, bind,
pres. dyáti etc. These, as having an accented á in the sign, have
plainly no right to be put in this class; and they are better referred to the
á-class (see above, 753 c). Outside the present-system they show ā- and
i-forms; and in that system the ya is often resolved into ia in the oldest
language.
762. The ya-class is the only one thus far described which shows
any tendency toward a restriction to a certain variety of meaning. In this
tendency, as well as in the form of its sign, it appears related with the
class of distinctly defined meaning which is next to be taken up — the
passive, with yá-sign. Though very far from being as widely used as the
latter beside other present-systems, it is in some cases an intransitive
conjugation by the side of a transitive of some other class.
Irregularities of the ya-class.
763. The roots of this class ending in am lengthen their vowel
in forming the present-stem: they are klam, tam, dam, bhram, cam
be quiet, śram: for example, tā́myati, śrā́myati. From kṣam, however, only kṣamyate occurs; and cam labor makes śamyati (B.).
764. The root mad has the same lengthening: thus, mā́dyati.
765. The roots in īv — namely, dīv‚ sīv, srīv or śrīv, and
ṣṭhīv (from which no forms of this class are quotable) — are written by the grammarians with iv, and a similar lengthening in the
present-system is prescribed for them.
a. They appear to be properly dīū etc, since their vocalized final
in other forms is always ū; dīv is by this proved to have nothing to do
with the assumed root div shine, which changes to dyu (361 d): compare
240 b.
766. From the roots jṛ and tṛ (also written as jur and tir or tur)
come the stems jī́rya and tīrya, and jū́rya and tūrya (the last two only
in RV.); from pṛ comes pū́rya.
767. The rootvyadh is abbreviated to vidh: thus, vidhyati. And
any root which in other forms has a penultimate nasal loses it here: thus,
dṛ́hya from dṛṃh or dṛh; bhraśya from bhraṃś or bhraś; rajya from
rañj or raj.
275 ACCENTE D yá-CLASS (PASSIVE). [—771
IX. Accented yá-class: Passive conjugation.
768. A certain form of present-stem, inflected with
middle endings, is used only in a passive sense, and is formed
from all roots for which there is occasion to make a passive
conjugation. Its sign is an accented ET yá added to the
root: thus, ~hany a from y
-
" han slay, 5īT-2T āpyá
from √5ÍFI^āp obtain, J J -
gṛhya from √J|~» gyh (or grah)
seize: and so on, without any reference to the class according to which the active and middle forms are made.
769. The form of the root to which the passive-sign is added
is (since the accent is on the sign) the weak one: thus, a penultimate
nasal is dropped, and any abbreviation which is made in the weak
forms of the perfect (794), in the aorist optative (922 b), or before
ta of the passive participle (954), is made also in the passive presentsystem: thus, ajyá from √añj, badhyá from √bandh, ucyá from
√vac, ijyá from √yaj.
770. On the other hand, a final vowel of a root is in general
liable to the same changes as in other parts of the verbal system
where it is followed by y: thus —
a. Final i and u are lengthened: thus, mīyá from √mi; sūyá
from √su;
b. Final ā is usually changed to ī: thus, dīyá from √dā; hīyá
from √hā: but jñāyá from √jñā, and so khyāyá, khāyá, mnāyá, etc.;‚
e. Final ṛ is in general changed to ri: thus, kriyá from √kṛ;
but if preceded by two consonants (and also, itis claimed, in the root
ṛ), it has instead the guṇa-strengthening: thus, smaryá from √smṛ
(the only quotable case); — and in those roots which show a change
of ṛ to ir and ur (so-called ṛ–verbs: see 242), that change is made
here also, and the vowel is lengthened: thus, śīryá from √śṛ; pūr¬
yá from √pṛ.
771. The inflection of the passive-stem is precisely like
that of the other a-stems; it differs only in accent from
that of the class last given. It may be here presented,
therefore, in the same abbreviated form:
a. Exampl e of inflection: root "fí kṛ make; passivestem fśftfj kriyá:
771—] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 276
1. Present Indicative,
s. d. p.
kriyé kriyā́vahe kriyā́mahe
etc. etc. etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
b. The forms noticed as occurring in the older language are
alone here instanced:
s. d. p.
1 kriyāí kriyā́mahāi
2 kriyā́dhvāi
0 kriyā́te
3
kriyā́tāi kriyā́ntāi
c. The 3d pi. ending antāi is found once (ucyantāi K,).
3. Present Optative.
1 f Ä T f^rara|f% ÍÄrf %
kriyéyá kriyévahi kriyémahi
etc. etc. etc.
d. No forms of the passive optative chance to occur in RV. or AV.;
they are found, however, in the Brāhmaṇas, ChU. has once dhmāyīta.
4. Present Imperative.
2 Psfr-UH f^fiWft f5RW T
kriyásva kriyéthām kriyádhvam
etc. etc. etc.
5. Present Participle.
e. This is made with the suffix qH mana: thus,
fcfi-JHIUT kriyámāṇa.
f. In use, this participle is well distinguished from the other passive
participle by its distinctively present meaning: thus, kṛtá done, but kriyá¬
māṇa in process of doing, or being done.
6. Imperfect.
ákriye ákriyāvahi ákriyāmahi
etc. etc. etc.
g. The passive-sign is never resolved into ia in the Veda.
772. The roots tan and khan usually form their passives from
parallel roots in ā: thus, tāyáte, khāyáte (but also tanyate, khan-
277 SO-CALLE D TENT H OR CUT-CLASS. [—775
yate); and dham, in like manner, makes either dhamyate or dhmāyáte.
The corresponding form to √jan, namely jā́yate (above, 761 b), is
apparently a transfer to the preceding class.
773. By their form, mriyáte dies, and dhriyáte maintains
itself, is steadfast, are passives from the roots mṛ die and dhṛ hold;
although neither is used in a proper passive sense, and mṛ is not
transitive except in the derivative form mṛṇ (above, 731). With them
are to be compared the stems ā-driyá heed and ā-priyá be busy,
which are perhaps peculiar adaptations of meaning of passives from
the roots dṛ pierce and pṛ fill.
774. Examples of the transfer of stems from the yá- or passive
class to the ya- or intransitive class were given above (761b); and it was
also pointed out that active instead of middle endings are occasionally, even
in the earlier language, assumed by forms properly passive: examples are
ā́ dhmāyati and vy àpruṣyat (ŚB.), bhūyati (MāiU.). In the
epics, however (as a part of their general confusion of active and middle
forms: 529a), active endings are by no means infrequently taken by the
passive: thus, śakyati, śrūyanti, bhriyantu, ijyant-, etc.
The so-caUed Tenth or cur-Class.
775. As was noticed above (607), the Hindu grammarians —
and, after their example, most European also — recognize yet another conjugation-class, coordinate with those already described; its
stems show the class-sign áya, added to a generally strengthened
root (for details as to the strengthening, see 1042). Though this is
no proper class, but a secondary or derivative conjugation (its stems
are partly of causative formation, partly denominative with altered
accent), an abbreviated example of its forms may, for the sake of
accordance with other grammars, be added here.
a. Example: root cint think, meditate; stem cintáya:
active. middle.
Pres. Indie, cintáyāmi cintáye
Subj. cintáyāni cintáyāi
Opt. cintáyeyam cintáyeya
Pple. cintáyont cintáyamāna
Impf. ácintayam ácintaye
b. The inflection, of course, is the same with that of other forms
from a-stems (733a).
c. The middle participle, in the later language, is more often made
with āna instead of māna: thus, ointayāna: see 1043f.
776— ] IX. PRESENT-SYSTEM. 278
Uses of the Present and Imperfect.
776 . The uses of the mode-forms of the present-system have
been already briefly treated iu the preceding chapter (57 2ff.).The
tense-uses of the two indicative tenses, present and imperfect, call
here for only a word or two of explanation.
777 . The present has, besides itsstrictly present use, the same
subsidiary uses which belong in general to the tense: namely, the
expression of habitual action, offuture action, and of past action in
lively narration.
a. Examples of future meaning are: imáṁ céd vā́ imé cinváte
táta evá no «bhíbhavanti (ŚB.) verily if these build this up, then fhey
will straightway get the better of us; agnir ātmabhavam prādād yatra
vāñchati nāiṣadhaḥ (MBh.) Agni gave his own presence wherever the
Nishadhan should desire; svāgataṁ te 'stu kiṁ karomi tava (R.) welcome to thee; whatshall I do for thee?
b. Examples of past meaning are: úttarā sū́r ádharaḥ putrá
āsīd dā́nuḥ śaye sahávatsā ná dhenúḥ (RV.) the mother was over,
the son under; there Dūnu lies, like a cow with her calf; prahasanti ca
tāṁ kecid abhyasūyanti cā 'pare akurvata dayāṁ kecit (MBh.)
some ridicule her, some revile her, some pitied her; tato yasya vacanāt
tatrā 'valambitās taṁ sarve tiraskurvanti (H.) thereupon they all
fall to reproaching him by whose advice they had alighted there*
778 . In connection with certain particles, the present has rather
more definitely the value of a past tense. Thus:
a. With purā́ formerly: thus, saptarṣī́n u ha sma vāí purá
rkṣā íty ā́cakṣate (ŚB.) the seven sages, namely, are of old called the
bears; tanmātram api cen mahyaṁ na dadāti purā bhavān (MBh.)
if you have never before given me even an atom.
b. With the asseverative particle sma: thus, śrámeṇa ha sma
vāí tád devā́ jayanti yád eṣāṁ jáyyam ā́sá rṣayaś ca (ŚB.) in
truth, both gods and sages were wont to win by penance what was to be
won; āviṣṭaḥ kalinā dyūte jīyate sma nalas tadā (MBh.) then Nala,
being possessed by Kali, was beaten in play.
c. No example of this last construction is found in either RV. or
AV,, or elsewhere in the metrical parts of the Veda. In the Brāhmaṇas,
only habitual action is expressed by it. At all periods of the language, the
use of sma with a verb as pure asseverative particle, with no effect on the
tense-meaning, is very common; and the examples later are hardly to be
distinguished from the present of lively narration — of which the whole
construction is doubtless a form.
779 . The imperfect has remained unchanged in value through
the whole history of the language: it is the tense of narration; it
expresses simple past time, without any other implication.
a. Compare what is said later (end of chap. X. and chap. XI.) asto
the value of the older past tenses, the perfect and aorist.
279 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PERFECT. [—782
CHAPTE R X .
THE PERFECT-SYSTEM.
780. T H E perfect-system in the later language, as has
been seen above (535), consists only of an indicative tense
and a participle — both of them in the two voices, active
and middle.
a. In the oldest language, the perfect has also its modes and
its augment-preterit, or pluperfect, or is not less full in its apparatus
of forms than is the present-system (see 808 ff.).
781. The formation of the perfect is essentially alike
in all verbs, differences among them being of only subordinate consequence, or having the character of irregularities.
The characteristics of the formation are these:
1. a stem made by reduplication of the root;
2. a distinction between stronger and weaker forms of
stem, the former being used (as in presents of the First
or non-a-conjugation) in the singular active, the latter in
all other persons;
3. endings in some respects peculiar, unlike those of
the present;
4. the frequent use, especially in the later language,
of a union-vowel ^ i between stem and endings.
782. Reduplication . In roots beginning with a consonant, the reduplication which forms the perfect-stem is
of the same character with that which forms the presentstem of the reduplicating conjugation-class (see 643) — but
with this exception, that radical J3f a and -3iī ā and ?T ṛ (or
-ST|" ar) have only 5f a, and never ^ i, as vowel of the reduplicating syllable: thus, from √"J pṛ fill comes the presentstem ftq pipṛ, but the perfect-stem qq papṛ; from √*TT mā
782—-] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM . 2 8 0
measure comes the present-stem fÌRT mimā, but the perfectstem J-FTT mama; and so on.
a. Irregularities of roots with initial consonants will be given below, 784.
783. For roots beginning with a vowel, the rules of
reduplication are these:
a. A root with initial % a before a single final consonant repeats the 5f a, which then fuses with the radical
vowel to -~í ā (throughout the whole inflection): thus, -~f~
ād from ad eat; and in like manner 5Tls^āj, ETH^an,
-~fīī ās, 5Tīah. The root ṛ forms likewise throughout
~T~ ār (as if from ~ ~ ar).
b. A root with ^ i or 3 u before a single final consonant follows the same analogy, except in the strong forms
(sing, act.); here the vowel of the radical syllable has guṇa,
becoming " e or 35fT o; and before this, the reduplicating
vowel maintains its independent form, and is separated from
the radical syllable by its own semivowel: thus, from >~f
is comes ~í īṣ in weak forms, but ^EP-Myeṣ in strong; from
√3~ uc, in like manner, come "S"" ūc and 3^T-T uvoc. The
root ^ i, a single vowel, also falls under this rule, and
forms ^TJy (y added before a vowel) and ^ iye.
c. Roots which begin with vowels long by nature or by
position do not in general make a perfect-system, but use
instead a periphrastic formation, in which the perfect tense
of an auxiliary verb is added to the accusative of a verbal
noun (see below, chap. XV. : 1070 ff.).
d. To this rule, however, √āp obtain (probably originally ap:
1087f) constitutes an exception, making the constant perfect-stem āp (as
if from ap: above, a). Also are met with īḍé (RV.) and īḍire from
√īḍ, and īriré (V.) from √īr.
e. For the peculiar reduplication ān, belonging to certain roots with
initial vowels, see below, 788.
784. A number of roots beginning with va and ending with
a single consonant, which in various of their verbal forms and derivatives abbreviate the va to u, do it also in the perfect, and are
treated like roots with initial u (above, 783b), except that they retain
281 REDUPLICATION. [—788
the full form of root in the strong persons of the singular active.
Thus, from √vac speak come ūc and uvac; from √vas dwell come
ūṣ and uvas; and so on.
a. The roots showing this abbreviation are vac, vap, vad, vaś,
vas, vah; and vā weave is said to follow the same rule.
b. A single root beginning with ya, namely yaj offer, has the
same contraction, forming the stems iyaj and īj.
c. Occasional exceptions are met with: as, vavāca and vavakṣé
(RV.); vavāpa and vavāha and vavāhatus (E. and later); yejé (V.).
785. A number of roots having ya after a first initial consonant
take i (from the y) instead of a in the reduplicating syllable: thus,
from √vyac comes vivyac; from √pyā comes pipyā.
a. These roots are vyac, vyath, vyadh, vyā, jyā, pyā, syand;
and, in the Veda, also tyaj„ with cyu and dyu‚ which have the rootvowel u. Other sporadic cases occur.
b. A single root with va is treated in the same way: namely
svap, which forms suṣvap.
0. These roots are for the most part abbreviated in the weak forms:
see below, 794.
786. A considerable number of roots have in the Veda a long
vowel in their reduplication.
a. Thus, of roots reduplicating with ā: kan, kip, gṛdh, tṛp, tṛṣ,
dṛh, dhṛ, dhṛṣ, nam, mah, mṛj, mṛś, ran, radh, rabh, vañc, van,
vaś, vas clothe, vāś, vṛj, vṛt, vṛdh, vṛṣ, śad prevail, sah, skambh.
Some of these occur only in isolated cases; many have also forms with
short vowel. Most are Vedic only; but dādhāra is common also in the
Brāhmaṇa language, and is even found later. As to jāgṛ, see 1020 a.
b. Of roots reduplicating with ī; the so-called roots (676) dīdhī
and dīdī, which make the perfect from the same stem with the present:
thus, dīdétha, dīdā́ya; dīdhima, dīdhyus (also dīdhiyus, dīdiyus).
But pīpī has pipye, pipyus, etc., with short I. In AV. occurs once
jīhīḍa, and in AB. (and AA.) bībhāya.
c. Of roots reduplicating with ū: tu, jū, and śū (or śvā).
787. A few roots beginning with the (derivative: 42) palatal mutes
and aspiration show a reversion to the more original guttural in the radical
syllable after the reduplication : thus, √ci forms ciki; √cit forms cikit;
√ji forms jigi; √hi forms jighi; √han forms jaghan (and the same
reversions appear in other reduplicated forms of these roots: 216 1), A
root dā protect is said by the grammarians to form digi; but neither root
nor perfect is quotable.
788. A small number of roots with initial a or ṛ (ar) show
the anomalous reduplication ān in the perfect.
a. Thus (the forms occurring mainly in the older language only):
788-] X . PERFECT-SYSTEM . 282
√añj or aj, which forms the pres. anákti, has the perfect ānañ¬
ja and ānajé etc. (with anajā and anajyāt);
√aś attain (from which comes once in RV. anáśāmahāi), has the
weak forms ānaśma etc. (with opt. ānaśyām), ānaśé etc. (and LŚS.
has ānaśadhve), and the strong forms ānáṃśa and ānāśa —along with
the regular āśa etc.;
√ṛdh (from which comes once ṛṇádhat) has ānṛdhús and ānṛdhe;
√ṛc or arc has ānṛcús and ānṛcé, and later ānarca and ānarcus;
√arh has (in TS.) ānṛhús;
anāha (RV., once) has been referred to a root oh, elsewhere unknown,
and explained as of this formation; but with altogether doubtful propriety.
b. The later grammar, then, sets up the rule that roots beginning
with a and ending with more than one consonant have ān as their regular
reduplication; and such perfects are taught from roots like akṣ, arj, and
añc or ac; but the only other quotable forms appear to be ānarchat
(MBh.) and ānarṣat (TA.); which are accordingly reckoned as "pluperfects".
789. One or two individual cases of irregularity are the following:
a. The extremely common root bhū be has the anomalous reduplication ba, forming the stem babhū; and, in the Veda, √sū forms
in like manner sasū.
b. The root bhṛ bear has in the Veda the anomalous reduplication
ja (as also in intensive: 1002); but RV. has once also the regular babhre,
and pple babhrāṇá.
c. The root ṣṭhīv spew forms either tiṣṭhīv (ŚB. et al.) or ṭiṣṭhīv
(not quotable).
d. Vivakvā́n (RV., once) is doubtless participle of √vac, with irregular reduplication (as in the present, 660),
790. Absence of reduplication is met with in some cases. Thus:
a. The root vid know has, from the earliest period to the latest,
a perfect without reduplication, but otherwise regularly made and
inflected: thus, véda, véttha, etc., pple vidvā́ṃs. It has the meaning of a present. The root vid find forms the regular vivéda.
b. A few other apparently perfect forms lacking a reduplication are
found in RV.: they are takṣathus and takṣus, yamátus, skambháthus
and skambhus, nindima (for ninidima ?), dhiṣe and dhire (? √dhā),
and vidré and arhire(? see 613). And AV. VS. have cetatus. The
participial words dāśvā́ṃs, mīḍhvā́ṃs, sāhvā́ṃs are common in the oldest
language; and RV. has once jānúṣas (√jñā), and khidvas (voc), perhaps for cikhidvas.
c. A few sporadic cases also are quotable from the later language,
especially from the epics: thus, karṣatus, ceṣṭa and ceṣṭatus, bhrā¬
jatus, sarpa, śaṃsus and śaṃsire, dhvaṃsire, sraṃsire, jalpire,
edhire; also the pples śaṃsivāṃs and darśivāṃs, the latter being not
infrequent.
283 STRONG A N D WEA K STEM-FORMS . [—793
791. For an anomalous case or two of reduplicated preposition, see
below, 1087 f.
792. Strong and weak stem-forms. In the three
persons of the singular active, the root-syllable is accented,
and exhibits usually a stronger form than in the rest of the
tense-inflection. The difference is effected partly by strengthening the root in the three persons referred to, partly by
weakening it in the others, partly by doing both.
793. A s regards the strengthening:
a. A final vowel takes either the guṇa or vṛddhi change
in 1st sing, act., guṇa in 2d, and vṛddhi in 3d: thus, from
√ít bhī, 1st fsR bibhé or flfà bibhāí; 2d I^R bibhé; 3d
fsp-f bibhāí; from √~ kṛ, 1st [~ cakár or īī"7-
' cakār,
2d TJC†,^ eakár, 3d "JRīī^" cakār.
b. But the ū of √bhū remains unchanged, and adds v before a
vowel-ending: thus, babhū́va etc.
c. Medial ~ a before a single final consonant follows
the analogy of a final vowel, and is lengthened or vriddhied
in the 3d. sing., and optionally in the first: thus, from √rT^
tap, 1st rTrT-T tatáp or cTcTīīJ tatā́p, 2d rTcTtatáp, 3d rfrö "
tatāp .
d. In the earlier language, however, the weaker of the two forms
allowed by these rules in the first person is almost exclusively in use: thus,
1st only bibháya , tatápa ; 3d bibhā́ya, tatā́pa. Exceptions are cakār a
and jagrā́ha (doubtful reading) in AV., cakār a in ACS. and BAU. (ŚB.
cakara), jigāya in ACS., as first persons.
e. A medial short vowel has in allthree persons alike
the guṇa-strengthening (where this is possible: 240): thus,
from y ~ g druh comes J?Jc g dudróh; from √f%5T^viś comes
fsji^vivec; from √êfi^kṛt comes rffi?T^cakart.
f. An initial short vowel before a single final consonant is to be
treated like a medial, but the quotable examples are very few: namely, iyeṣa from √iṣ seek, uvocitha and uvoca from √uc‚ uvoṣ a
from √uṣ. A S to roots i and ṛ, whose vowels are both initial and
final, see above, 783 a, b.
g. These rules are said by the grammarians to apply to the 2d sing,
always when it has simple tha as ending; if it has itha (below, 797d).
793—] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 284
the accent is allowed to fall on any one of the syllables of the word, and
the root-syllable if unaccented has sometimes the weak form (namely, in
contracted stems with e for medial a: below, 794e; and in certain other
verbs, as vivijitha). The earlier language, however, affords no example
of a 2d sing., whatever its ending, accented on any other than the radical
syllable, or failing to conform to the rules of strengthening as given above
(in a, c, e).
h. Occasional instances of strengthening in other than the singular
persons are met with: thus, yuyopima and viveśus (RV.), pasparśus
(KeU.), and, in the epics, cakartus and cakartire, cakarṣatus, jugū¬
hire, nanāmire, bibhedus, vavāhatus, viveśatus, vavarṣus. The
roots dṛ, pṛ, and śṛ, and optionally jṛ, are said by the grammarians to
have the strong stem in weak forms • but no examples appear to be quotable.
AV., however, has once jaharus (probably a false reading); and in the
later language occur caskare (√kṛ scatter) and tastare.
i. The root mṛj has (as in the present-system: 627) vṛddhi instead
of guṇa in strong forms: thus, mamarja; and √guh (also as in present:
745 c) has ū instead of o (but also juguhe E.).
794. As regards the weakening in weak forms:
a. It has been seen above (783 b) that roots beginning with i
or u fuse reduplicating and radical syllable together to ī or ū in the
weak forms; and (784) that roots contracting va and ya to u or i
in the reduplication do it also in the root in weak forms, the two
elements here also coalescing to ū or ī.
b. A few roots having ya and va after a first initial consonant, and
reduplicating from the semivowel (785), contract the ya and va to i and
u: thus, vivic from √vyac, vividh from √vyadh (but vivyadhus
MBh.), suṣup from √svap. The extended roots jyā, pyā, vyā, śvā,
hvā show a similar apparent contraction, making their weak forms from
the simpler roots jī, pī, vī, śū, hū, while hvā must and śvā may get
their strong forms also from the same (and only jijyāú is quotable from
the others).
c. The root grabh or grah (if it be written thus: see 729a) contracts to gṛh, making the three forms of stem jagráh (1st and 2d sing,
act.), jagrā́h (3d), and jagṛh; but prach (if it be so written: see 756a)
remains unchanged throughout.
d. Some roots omit in weak forms of this tense, or in some of them,
a nasal which is found in its strong forms: thus, we have cakradé etc.
(RV.) from √krand; tatasré (RV.) from √taṃs; dadaśvā́ṃs (RV.) from
√daṃś; bedhús, bedhé, etc. (AV.)from √bandh; sejus (ŚB.) from
√sañj; caskabhāná (AV.) from √skambh; tastabhús etc. (V.),
tastabhāná (V.B.), from √stambh. Compare also 788 a.
e. A number of roots having medial a between single consonants
drop that vowel. These are, in the later language, gam, khan, jan,
2 8 5 STRON G A N D WEA K STEM-FORMS. [—795
nan, ghas; they form the weak stems jagm, cakhn, jajñ, jaghn
(compare 637), jakṣ (compare 640): but RV. has once jajanús.
f. In the ‚old language are found in like manner mamnāthe and
mamnāte from √man; vavné from √van; tatne, tatniṣe, tatnire
from √tan (beside tatane, and tate, as if from √tā); paptima and
paptús and paptivā́ṃs from √pat (beside pet-forms; below, g); pap¬
né from √pan; saścima and saścus, saśce and saściré, from √sac
g. Roots in general having medial a before a single final consonant, and beginning also with a single consonant that is repeated
unchanged in the reduplication — that is, not an aspirate, a guttural
mute, or h — contract their root and reduplication together into
one syllable, having e as its vowel: thus, √sad forms the weak stem
sed, √pac forms pec, √yam forms yem; and so on.
h. Certain roots not having the form here defined are declared by the
grammarians to undergo the same contraction — most of them optionally;
and examples of them are in general of very rare occurrence. They are as
follows: rāj (E.C.) and rādh (radhP), notwithstanding their long vowel;
phaṇ, phal (phelire C ), bhaj (occurs from RV. down), though their initial is changed in reduplication; trap, tras (tresus E.C), śrath, syam,
svan, though they begin with more than one consonant; dambh (debhús,
RV., from the weaker dabh), though it ends with more than one; and
bhram (bhremus etc. KSS.), bhrāj, granth, svañj, in spite of more
reasons than one to the contrary. And ŚB. has sejus from √sañj, and
KB. has śremus from √śram. On the other hand, RV. has once rarabh¬
má, and R. has papatus, for petus, from √pat.
i. This contraction is allowed also in 2d sing. act. when the ending
is itha: thus, tenitha beside tatantha (but no examples are quotable
from the older language).
j . The roots śaś and dad (from dā: 672) are said to reject the
contraction; but no perfect forms of either appear to have been met with
in use.
k. From √tṛ (or tar) occurs terus (R.); and jerus from √jṛ is
authorized by the grammarians — both against the general analogy of roots in ṛ.
I. Roots ending in ā lose their ā before all endings beginning
with a vowel, including those endings that assume the union-vowel i
(796) — unless in the latter case it be preferred to regard the i as a
weakened form of the ā.
795. Endings, and their union with the stem.
The general scheme of endings of the perfect indicative has
been already given (553 c); an dit has also been pointed out
(543 a) that roots ending in 5īT ā have ETT āu in 1st and 3d
sing, active.
795—] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 286
a. The ending mas instead of ma is found in śuśrumas (E.C.).
For the alleged occurrence of ḍhve instead of dhve in 2d pi. mid., see
226 c.
796. Those of the endings which begin with a consonant — namely ST tha, " va, ^ ma in active; H se, -3%
vahe, J~f% mahe, § dhve, ^ re in middle — are very often,
and in the later language usually, joined to the base with
the help of an interposed union-vowel ^ i.
a. The union-vowel i is found widely used also in other parts of the
general verbal system: namely, in the sibilant aorist, the futures, and the
verbal nouns and adjectives (as also in other classes of derivative stems).
In the later language, a certain degree of correspondence is seen among the
different parts of the same verb, as regards their use or non-use of the
connective; but this correspondence is not so close that general rules respecting it can be given with advantage; and it will be best to treat each
formation by itself.
b. The perfect is the tense in which the use of i has established
itself most widely and firmly in the later language.
797. The most important rules as to the use of ^ i in
the later language are as follows:
a. The ^ re of 3d pi. mid. has it always.
b. The other consonant-endings, except tha of 2d
sing, act., take it in nearly all verbs.
c. But it is rejected throughout by eight verbs — namely kṛ
make, bhṛ bear, sṛ go, vṛ choose, dm run, śru hear, stu praise, sru
flow; and it is allowably (not usually) rejected by some others, in
general accordance with their usage in other formations.
d. In 2d sing, act., it is rejected not only by the eight
verbs just given, but also by many others, ending in vowels or in consonants, which in other formations have no
^ i ; but it is also taken by many verbs which reject it in
other formations; — and it is optional in many verbs, including those in Eiī ā (of which the Eft ā is lost when the
ending is itha), and most of those in ^ i, ^ ī, and 3 u.
e. The rules of the grammarians, especially as regards the use of tha
or itha, run out into infinite detail, and are not wholly consistent with
one another; and, as the forms are very infrequent, it is not possible to
criticise the statements made, and to tell how far they are founded on the
facts of usage.
287 ENDINGS . [—800
f. With this i, afinalradical i or ī is not combined, but changed into y or iy. The ū of √bhū becomes ūv throughout before
a vowel.
798. In the older language, the usage is in part quite otherwise. Thus:
a. In the RV., the union-vowel i is taken by roots ending in consonants provided the last syllable of the stem is a heavy one, but not otherwise : thus, ā́sitha, uvócitha, vivéditha, but tatántha and vivyáktha;
ūcimá, paptima, sedima, yuyopimá, but jaganma, jagṛbhmá, yuyuj¬
ma; ūciṣé, jajñiṣé, sasāhiṣe, but vivitse and dadṛkṣé; bubhujmàhe
and śāśadmahe etc. (no examples of ivahe or imahe chance to occur,
nor any of either idhve or dhve); ījiré, jajñiré, yetiré, tataksiré,
but cāklpré, vividré, duduhré, paspṛdhré, tatasré (and so on:
twenty-two forms). The only exception in RV. is véttha from √vid,
without i (in Br., also āttha from √áh: below, 801a). The other Vedic
texts present nothing inconsistent with this rule, but in the Brāhmaṇas 3d
pi. forms in ire are made after light syllables also: thus, sasṛjire, bubudh¬
ire, yuyujire, rurudhire.
b. In roots ending with a vowel, the early usage is more nearly like
the later. Thus: for roots in ā the rule is the same (except that no 2d
sing, in itha is met with), as dadhimá, dadhiṣé, dadhidhvé, dadhiré
(the only persons with i quotable from RV. and AV. ; and RV. has dadhre
twice); — roots in ṛ appear also to follow the later rule: as cakṛṣé,
papṛṣe, vavṛṣé, vavṛmáhe, but dadhriṣe and jabhriṣe, and in 3d
pi. mid. both cakriré and dadhrire; — √bhū has both babhū́tha
(usually) and babhū́vitha, but only babhūvimá (AV.). But there are
found, against the later rules, suṣuma, cicyuṣe, juhuré, and juhūré,
without i : the instances are too few to found a rule upon.
799. The ending riré of 3d pi. mid. is found in RV. in six forms:
namely, cikitrire, jagṛbhriré, dadrire, bubhujriré, vividrire, sasṛj¬
rire; to which SV. adds duduhrire, and TB. dadṛśrire.
800. Examples of inflection. By way of illustration of the rules given above may be given in full the perfect indicative inflection of the following verbs:
a. As example of the normal inflection of a root with
final consonant, we take the root gTJ budh know: its strong
form of perfect-stem is e-rafa bubódh; weak form, sr^ J
bubudh.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
bubódha bubudhivá -dhimá bubudhé -dhiváhe -dhimáhe
800H X. PERFECT-SYSTEM.
2 5|%fq" sHUÉ-W SRÌtf^ ^QVRQ SR7J-1&
bubódhitha -dháthus -dhá bubudhiṣé -dhā́the -dhidhvé
bubódha -dhátus -dhús bubudhé -dhā́te -dhiré
b. The asserted variety of possible accent in 2d sing. act. (above,
793 g) needs to be noted both in this and in the remaining paradigms.
c. As example of the normal inflection of a root with
final i or u-vowel, we may take the root ^ft nī lead; its forms
of stem are pHu nináy or pFTHT nināy, and fMì" ninī.
1 fror, PRĪĪ T ftfàR Hf%r ÍHKIH ^
nináya, ninā́ya ninyivá ninyimá ninyé ninyiváhe ninyimáhe
ninétha, nináyitha ninyáthus ninyá ninyiṣé ninyā́the ninyidhvé
ninā́ya ninyátus ninyús ninyé ninyā́te ninyiré
d. The root krī would make (129 a) in weak forms cikriyivá,
cikriyátus, cikriyús, etc.; and √bhū is inflected as follows in the
active (middle forms not quotable) :
1 babhū́va babhūvivá babhūvimá
2 babhū́tha, babhū́vitha babhūváthus babhūvá
3 babhū́va babhūvátus babhūvús
Other roots in ū or u change this to uv before the initial vowel of
an ending.
e. As example of the inflection of a root ending in 39TT
a, we may take da give: its forms of stem are dadā
and <*~" dad or ffi dadi: see above, 7941).
dadāú dadivá dadimá dadé dadiváhe dadimáhe
2 ^m, %ffô ^~T ^ ^fi-í
dadā́tha, dadithá dadáthus dadá dadiṣé dadā́the dadidhvé
3
^ft 5Tf^ ^ ^
dadāú dadátus dadús dadé dadā́te dadiré
f. The RV. has once paprā́ for paprāú (and jahā́ for jahāú?).
289 EXAMPLES OF INFLECTION. [—800
g. As example of a root with medial % a showing fusion of root and reduplication, resulting in medial "7 e‚ in
the weak forms (794g), we may take r"T tan stretch: its
forms of stem are cTcFf tatan or CTCTR tatān, and ten.
tatána, tatā́na tenivá tenimá tené teniváhe tenimáhe
tatántha, tenithá tenáthus tená teniṣé tenā́the tenidhvé
tatā́na tenátus tenús tené tenā́te teniré
h. The root jan, with the others which expel medial a in weak
forms (794 e), makes jajántha or jajñithá, jajñivá, jajñús ; jajñé,
jajñimáhe, jajñiré; and so on.
i. As example of a root with initial Sf va contracted
to 3 u in the reduplication, and contracted with the reduplication to ~J ū in weak forms (784), we may take "~^vac
speak: its forms of stem are 3ST~ uvac or 3cIT-T uvāc, and
"S"" ŪC.
uváca, uvā́ca ūcivá ūcimá ūcé ūciváhe ūcimáhe
uváktha, uvácitha ūcáthus ūcá ūciṣé ūcāthe ūcidhvé
3
3 ~ ~ 3T~Tīī 3~TT 3 ^ 373TH
uvā́ca ūcátus ūcús ūcé ūcā́te ūciré
j. In like manner, √yaj forms iyája or iyā́ja, iyáṣṭha or iyá–
jitha; ījé, ījiṣé, and so on; √uc has uvóca and uvócitha in the
strong forms, and all the rest like vac.
k. Of the four roots in SR" ṛ mentioned at 797 c‚ the
inflection is as foUows:
cakára, cakā́ra cakṛvá cakṛmá cakré cakṛváhe cakṛmáhe
cakártha cakráthus cakrá cakṛṣé cakrā́the cakṛdhvé
cakā́ra cakrátus cakrús cakré cakrā́te cakriré
800—] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 2 9 0
I. Of the roots in TR ṛ in general, the first persons are
made as follows:
dadhára, dadhā́ra dadhrivá dadhrimá dadhré dadhriváhe dadhrimàhe
m. We may further add here, finally, the active inflection (the middle
is not in use) of the perfect of as be, which (like babhū́va and cakā́ra,
given above) is frequently employed as an auxiliary.
1 ā́sa āsivá āsimá
2 ā́sitha āsáthus āsá
3 ā́sa āsàtus āsús
801. A few miscellaneous irregularities call still for
notice:
a. The root ah speak occurs only in the perfect indicative, and
only in the 3d persons of all numbers and in the 2d sing, and du,,
in active (and in 2d sing, the h is irregularly changed to t before
the ending): thus, āttha, ā́ha; āhathus, āhatus; āhús (in V., only
ā́ha and āhús are met with).
b. From √vā weave, the 3d pi. act. ūvus occurs in RV., and no
other perfect form appears to have been met with in use. It is allowed
by the grammarians to be inflected regularly as vā; and also as vay (the
present-stem is váya: 761 f), with contraction of va to u in weak forms;
and further, in the weak forms, as simple u.
c The root vyā envelop has in RV. the perfect-forms vivyathus
and vivyé, and no others have been met with in use; the grammarians
require the strong forms to be made from vyay, and the weak from vī.
d. The root i go forms in RV. and A V. the 2d sing. act. iyátha
beside the regular iyétha; and beside īriré from √īr, RV. has several
times eriré.
e. RV. has an anomalous accent in dádṛśe and dádṛśre (beside
dadṛkṣé) and the pple dádṛśāna. And ciketa (once, beside cikéta) is
perhaps a kindred anomaly.
f. Persons of the perfect from the ir-forms of roots in changeable ṛ
(242) are titirus and tistire (both RV.); and they have corresponding
participles.
g. The bastard root ūrṇu (713) is said by the grammarians to make
the perfect-stem ūrṇunu; the roots majj and naś are said to insert a
nasal in the 2d sing, active, when the ending is simple tha: thus, ma¬
maṅktha, nanaṃṣṭha (also mamajjitha and neśitha).
h. Further may be noted sasajjatus (MBh.: √sañj, which has in
passive the secondary form sajj), rurundhatus (R.), and dudūhus (BhP).
I. The anomalous ajagrabhāiṣam (AB. vi. 35) seems a formation on
the perfect-stem (but perhaps for ajigrabhiṣan, desid.*?).
291 PARTICIPLE. [—805
Perfect Participle.
802. The ending of the active participle is 5TÍīī^vāṃs
(that is to say, in the strong forms: it is contracted to
úṣ in the weakest, and replaced by SFT vat in the middle
forms: see above, 458 ff). It is added to the weak form
of the perfect stem — as shown, for example, in the dual
and plural of the active inflection of the given verb; and,
mechanically, the weakest participle-stem is identical with
the 3d pi. active. Thus, SRirtH bubudhvā́ṃs, Pi4Wīīī
ninīvāṃs, "^°MIH^cakṛvāṃs.
803. If the weak form of the perfect stem is monosyllabic, the ending takes the union-vowel ^ i (which, however,
disappears in the weakest cases): thus, rìPl^iīī_^tenivāṃs,
^fcHÌ^ūcivāṃs, xrf^TīīJajñivā́ṃs , -yií^fa^ ādivāṃs (from√5|~ ad: 783a), and so on; ^^ft^dadivāṃs and its like,
from roots in 3iī ā, are to be reckoned in the one class or
the other according as we view the § i as weakened rootvowel or as union-vowel (7941).
a. But participles of which the perfect-stem is monosyllabic by absence of the reduplication do not take the union-vowel: thus, vidvā́ṃs,
and in V., dāśvā́ṃs (SV. dāśivā́ṃs), mīḍhvā́ṃs, sāhvā́ṃs, khid¬
vāṃs (?); and RV. has also dadvā́ṃs (AV. dadivā́ṃs and once dadāvā́ṃs)
from √dā (or dad: 672); and án-āśvāṃs (√aś eat) occurs in TS. and
TB. But A V. has viśivā́ṃs and varjivāṃs (in negative fem. ávarjuṣī).
804. Other Vedic irregularities calling for notice are few. The long
vowel of the reduplication (786) appears in the participle as in the indicative:
thus, vāvṛdhvā́ṃs, sāsahvā́ṃs, jūjuvā́ṃs. RV. and AV. have sasavā́ṃs
from √san or sā. RV. makes the participial forms of √tṛ or tar from
different modifications of the root: thus, titirvā́ṃs, but tatarúṣas. Respecting the occasional exchanges of strong and weak stem in inflection,
see above, 462 c.
805. a. From roots gam and nan the Veda makes the strong stems
jaganvā́ṃs (as to the n, see 212 a) and jaghanvā́ṃs; the later language
allows either these or the more regular jagmivāṃs and jaghnivā́ṃs (the
weakest stem-forms being everywhere jagmúṣ and jaghnúṣ"j. RV. has
also tatanvā́ṃs.
805-] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 292
b. From three roots, vid find, viś‚ and dṛś, the later language
allows strong participle-stems to be made with the union-vowel, as well as
in the regular manner without it: thus, viviśivāṃs or viviśvāṃs; dadṛśi¬
vāṃs occurs in KṭhU. PB. has once cicchidivāṃs.
806. The ending of the middle participle is āná. It
is added to the weak form of perfect-stem, as this appears
in the middle inflection: thus, ~~IH bubudhāná, pKlh
ninyāná, dadāná, cT“R tenāna, xf^H jajñāná, 3""R
ūcāná.
a. In the Veda, the long reduplicating vowel is shown by many middle
participles: thus, vāvṛdhāná, vāvasāná, dādṛhāṇá, tūtujāná, etc.
RV. has śaśayāná from √śī (with irregular guṇa, as in the present-system: 629); tistirāṇá from √stṛ; and once, with māna, sasṛmāṇá
from √sṛ. A few participles with long redupl. vowel have it irregularly
accented (as if rather intensive: 1013): thus, tū́tujāna (also tūtujāná),
bā́badhāna, śā́śadāna, śū́śujāna, śū́śuvōna.
807. In the later language, the perfect participles have nearly gone
out of use; even the active appears but rarely, and is made from
very few verbs, and of the middle hardly any examples are quotable,
save such as the proper name yuyudhāna, the adjective onūcāna
learned in scripture, etc.
Modes of the Perfect.
808. Modes of the perfect belong only to the Vedic language,
and even are seldom found outside of the Rig-Veda.
a. To draw the line surely and distinctly between these and the
mode-forms from other reduplicated tense-stems — the present-stem of the
reduplicating class, the reduplicated aorist, and the intensive — is not possible, since no criterion of form exists which does not in some cases fail, and
since the general equivalence of modal forms from all stems (582), and the
common use of the perfect as a present in the Veda (823), deprive us of
a criterion of meaning. There can be no reasonable doubt, however, that
a considerable body of forms are to be reckoned here; optatives like ana¬
śyām and babhūyās and babhūyā́t, imperatives like babhūtu, subjunctives like jabhárat, show such distinctive characteristics of the perfect
formation that by their analogy other similar words are confidently classed
as belonging to the perfect.
809. The normal method of making such forms would appear
to be as follows: from a reduplicated perfect-stem, as (for example)
mumuc, an imperative would be made by simply appending, as
usual, the imperative endings; the derived subjunctive mode-stem
would be mumóca (accented after the analogy of the strong forms
293 MODES . [—812
of the perfect indicative), and would take either primary or secondary endings; and the optative mode-stems would be mumucyā́ in
the active, and mumucī (accent on personal endings) in the middle.
And the great majority of the forms in question (about three
quarters) are made in these ways. Thus:
810. Examples of the regular subjunctive formation are:
a. with secondary endings, active: 2d sing., papráthas, cākánas,
māmáhas, pipráyas, bubodhas, rāráṇas; 3d sing., cākánat, ja¬
bhárat, rāráṇat, sāsáhat, paspárśat, pipráyat; 1st pl., cākánāma,
tatánāma, śūśávāma; 3d pl., tatánan, papráthan (other persons do
not occur). This is the largest class of cases.
b. with primary endings, active: here seem to belong only dadhàr¬
ṣati and vavártati: compare the formation with different accent below,
811a.
c. of middle forms occur only the 3d sing, tatápate, śaśámate,
yuyójate, jujóṣate (SV.; RV. has jújoṣate); and the 3d pl. cākánanta,
tatánanta (and perhaps two or three others: below, 811b, end),
811. But not a few subjunctives of other formation occur; thus:
a. With strengthened root-syllable, as above, but with accent on the
reduplication (as in the majority of present-forms of the reduplicating class:
above, 645). Here the forms with primary endings, active, preponderate,
and are not very rare: for example, jújoṣasi, jújoṣati, jújoṣathas,
jújoṣatha (other persons do not occur). With secondary endings, jújoṣas,
jújoṣat, and jújoṣan aTe the forms that belong most distinctly here (since
dádāśas and súṣūdas etc. are perhaps rather aorists). And there is no
middle form but jújoṣate (RV.: see above, 810 c).
b. With unstrengthened root-syllable occur a small body of forms,
which are apparently also accented on the reduplication (accented examples
are found only in 3d pl. mid.): thus, active, for example, mumucas;
vavṛtat, vividat, śūśuvat; the only middle forms are dadhṛṣate,
vāvṛdhate, 3d sing.; and cákramanta, dádhṛṣanta, rúrucanta (with
dadabhanta, paprathanta, māmahanta, juhuranta, which might
also belong elsewhere: 810c),
o. Accented on the ending are vāvṛdhánta and cakṛpánta (which
are rather to be called augmentless pluperfects).
d. As to forms with double mode-sign, or transfers to an a-conjugation,
see below, 815.
812. Examples of the regular optative formation are:
a. In active: 1st sing., ānaśyām, jagamyām, papṛeyām, riric¬
yām; 2d sing., vavṛtyās, viviśyās, śuśrūyā́s, babhūyās; 3d sing.,
jagamyāt, vavṛtyāt, tutujyā́t, babhūyā́t; 2d du., jagmyātam, śuśrū¬
yā́tam; 1st pl., sāsahyāma, vavṛtyāma, śūśuyāma; 3d pl., tatanyus,
vavṛjyús, vavṛtyus. The forms are quite numerous.
812—] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 294
b. In middle, the forms are few: namely, 1st sing., vavṛtīya; 2d
sing., vāvṛdhīthā́s, cakṣamīthās; 3d sing., jagrasīta, vavṛtīta,
māmṛjīta, dudhuvīta, śuśucīta; 1st pl., vavṛtīmahi. And sāsa¬
hīṣṭhās and ririṣīṣṭa appear to furnish examples of precative optative
forms.
c. There is no irregular mode of formation of perfect optatives. Individual irregularities are shown by certain forms: thus, cakriyās, papīyāt,
śuśrūyā́s and śuśrūyā́tam, with treatment of the final as before the
passive-sign yá (770); anajyāt with short initial; śiśrītá from √śri;
jokṣīyāt is anomalous: ririṣes is the only form that shows a union-vowel
a (unless also siṣet, from √sā).
813. Of regular imperative forms, only a very small number are to
be quoted: namely, active, cākandhi, rārandhí, cikiddhi, titigdhi,
mumugdhí, śuśugdhí, and piprīhí; cākantu, rārantu, mumoktu,
and babhūtu; mumuktam and vavṛktam; jujuṣṭana and vavṛttana
(unless we are to add mamaddhí, mamattu, mamáttana); — middle,
vavṛtsva and vavṛddhvam. AV. has once dadṛśrām.
814. As irregular imperatives may be reckoned several which show
a union-vowel a, or have been transferred to an a-conjugation. Such are,
in the active, mumóeatam and jujosatam (2d du.), and mumócata
(2d pi.); in the middle, pipráyasva (only one found with accent), and
māmahasva, vāvṛdhasva, vāvṛṣasva (2d sing.), and māmahantām
(3d pl.: probably to be accented -ásva and -ántām).
815. Such imperatives as these, taken in connection with some of
the subjunctives given above (and a few of the "pluperfect" forms: below,
820), suggest as plausible the assumption of a double present-stem, with
reduplication and added a (with which the desiderative stems would be
comparable: below, 1026 ff.): for example, jujoṣa from √juṣ, from which
would come jújoṣasi etc. and jújoṣate (811a) as indicative, jújoṣas
etc as subjunctively used augmentless imperfect, and jujosatam as imperative. Most of the forms given above as subjunctives with primary
ending lack a marked and constant subjunctive character, and would pass
fairly well as indicatives. And it appears tolerably certain that from one
root at least, vṛdh, such a double stem is to be recognized; from vāvṛdha
come readily vāvṛdhate, vāvṛdhánta, and from it alone can come regularly vāvṛdhasva, vāvṛdhéte and vāvṛdhāti (once, RV.) — and, yet
more, the participle vavṛdhánt (RV. •, AV. vāvṛdhánt: an isolated case):
yet even here we have also vāvṛdhīthā́s, not vāvṛdhéthās. To assume
double present-stems, however, in all the cases would be highly implausible; it is better to recognize the formation as one begun, but not carried out.
a* Only one other subjunctive with double mode-sign — namely,
papṛcāsi — is found to set beside vāvṛdhāti.
816. Forms of different model are not very seldom made from the
same root: for example, from √muc‚ the subjunctives mumócas, múmO-
295 PLUPERFECT. [—821
cati, and mumucas; from √dhṛṣ, dadhárṣati and dadhṛṣate; from
√prī, the imperatives piprīhí and pipráyasva.
Pluperfect.
817. Of an augment-preterit from the perfect-stem, to which the
name of pluperfect is given on the ground of its formation (though
not of its meaning), the Veda presents a few examples; and one or
two forms of the later language (mentioned above, 788 b) have also
been referred to it.
a. There is much of the same difficulty in distinguishing the pluperfect as the perfect modes from kindred reduplicated formations. Between
it and the aorist, however, a difference of meaning helps to make a separation.
818. The normal pluperfect should show a strong stem in the singular active, and a weak one elsewhere — thus, mumoc and mumuc —
with augment prefixed and secondary endings added (us in 3d pi. act.,
ata in 3d pi. mid.).
a. Of forms made according to this model, we have, in the active:
1st sing., ajagrabham and acacakṣam (which, by its form, might be
aorist: 860); 2d sing, ájagan; 3d sing., ajogan and aciket; 2d du.,
amumuktam; 2d pi. ájaganta, and ájagantana and ajabhartana (a
strong form, as often in this person: 556a); 3d pi. (perhaps), ama¬
mandus and amamadus. To these may be added the augmentless cākán
and rārán, cikétam and cakaram. In the middle, the 3d pi. acakriran
and ajagmiran (with iran instead of ata), and the augmentless 2d sing,
jugūrthās and suṣupthās, are the most regular forms to be found.
819. Several forms from roots ending in consonants save the endings
in 2d and 3d sing. act. by inserting an ī (555 b): thus, ábubhojīs,
aviveśīs; arirecīt, ájagrabhīt (avāvarīt and avāvaśītām are rather
intensives); and the augmentless jíhiṃsīs (accent?) and dadharṣīt belong
with them.
820. A few forms show a stem ending in a: they are, in the active:
3d sing., asasvajat, acikitat, acakrat; in the middle: 3d sing., ápip¬
rata; 2d du., ápaspṛdhethām; 3d pi., atitviṣanta (which by its form
might be aorist), ádadṛhanta; and cakradat, cakṛpánta, vāvṛdhánta,
juhuranta, would perhaps be best classified here as augmentless forms
(compare 811, above).
Uses of the Perfect.
821. Perfects are quotable as made from more than half the
roots of the language, and they abound in use at every period and
in almost all branches of the literature, though not always with the
same value.
a. According to the Hindu grammarians, the perfect is used in the
821—] X. PERFECT-SYSTEM. 296
narration of facts not witnessed by the narrator; but there is no evidence
of its being either exclusively or distinctively so employed at any period.
b. In the later language, it is simply a preterit or past tense,
equivalent with the imperfect, and freely interchangeable or coordinated with it. It is on the whole less common than the imperfect,
although the preferences of different authors are diverse, and it sometimes exceeds the imperfect in frequency (compare (927).
c. The perfects veda and āha are everywhere used with present value. In the Brāhmaṇas, also others, especially dādhāra, also
dīdāya, bibhāya, etc.
822. In the Brāhmaṇas, the distinction of tense-value between perfect and imperfect is almost altogether lost, as in the later language. But
in most of the texts the imperfect is the ordinary tense of narration, the
perfect being only exceptionally used. Thus in PB., the imperfects are to
the perfects as more than a hundred to one; in the Brāhmaṇa parts of TS.
and TB,, as over thirty-four to one; and in those of MS. in about the
same proportion; in AB., as more than four to one, the perfect appearing
mostly in certain passages, where it takes the place of imperfect. It is
only in ŚB. that the perfect is much more commonly used, and even, to
a considerable extent, in coordination with the imperfect. Throughout the
Brāhmaṇas, however, the perfect participles have in general the true "perfect" value, indicating a completed or proximate past.
823. In the Veda, the case is very different. The perfect is used
as past tense in narration, but only rarely; sometimes also it has a true
"perfect" sense, or signifies a completed or proximate past (like the aorist
of the older language: 928); but oftenest it has a value hardly or not
at all distinguishable in point of time from the present. It is thus the
equivalent of imperfect, aorist, and present; and it occurs coordinated with
them all.
a. Examples are: of perfect with present, ná śrāmyanti ná ví
muñconty éte váyo ná paptuḥ (RV.) they weary not nor stop, they fly
like birds; sé 'd u rā́jā kṣayati carṣaṇīnā́m arā́n ná nemíḥ pari
tā́ babhūva (RV.) he in truth rules king of men; he embraces them all,
as the wheel the spokes; — of perfect with aorist, úpo ruruce yuvatir
ná yóṣā... ábhūd agníḥ samídhe mā́nuṣāṇām ákar jyótir bā́dh¬
amānā tàmāṃsi (RV.) she is come beaming like a young maiden; Agni
hath appeared for the kindling of mortals; she hath made light, driving away
the darkness; — of perfect with imperfect, áhann áhim ánv apás ta¬
tarda (RV.) he slew the dragon, he penetrated to the waters. Such a
coordination as this last is of constant occurrence in the later language:
e. g, mumude 'pūjayac cāi 'nām (R.) he was glad, and paid honor to
her; vastrānte jagrāha skandhadeśe 'sṛjat tasya srajam (MBh.) she
took hold of the end of his garment, and dropped a garland on his shoulders.
297 VARIETIE S OF AORIST . [—824
CHAPTE R X I .
THE AORIST SYSTEMS.
824. UNDER the name of aorist are included (as was
pointed out above, 532) three quite distinct formations, each
of which has its sub-varieties: namely —
I. A SIMPL E AORIS T (equivalent to the Greek "second
aorist"), analogous in all respects as to form and inflection
with the imperfect. It has two varieties: 1. the rootaorist, with a tense-stem identical with the root (corresponding to an imperfect of the root-class); 2. the a-aorist,
with a tense-stem ending in % a, or with union-vowel -5f a
before the endings (corresponding to an imperfect of the
a-class),
H . 3. A REDUPLICATIN G AORIST , perhaps in origin identical with an imperfect of the reduplicating class, but
having come to be separated from it by marked peculiarities
of form. It usually has a union-vowel a before the endings, or is inflected like an imperfect of one of the a-classes;
but a few forms occur in the Veda without such vowel.
III. A SIGMATI C or SIBILAN T AORIS T (corresponding to
the Greek "first aorist"), having for its tense-sign a īī^s
added to the root, either directly or with a preceding auxiliary i ; its endings are usually added immediately to the
tense-sign, but in a small number of roots with a unionvowel 35f a; a very few roots also are increased by īī^s for
its formation; and according to these differences it falls
into four varieties: namely, A. without union-vowel ET a
before endings: 4. s-aorist, with H s alone added to the
root; 5. iṣ-aorist, the same with interposed ^ i ; 6. siṣaorist, the same as the preceding with īī^s added at the
end of the root; B. with union-vowel E[ a, 7. sa-aorist.
825—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 298
825. A l l these varieties are bound together and made
into a single complex system by certain correspondences of
form and meaning. Thus, in regard to form, they are all
alike, in the indicative, augment-preterits to which there
does not exist any corresponding present; in regard to
meaning, although in the later or classical language they
are simply preterits, exchangeable with imperfects and perfects, they all alike have in the older language the general
value of a completed past or "perfect", translatable by have
done and the like.
826. The aorist-system is a formation of infrequent occurrence in
mueh of the classical Sanskrit (its forms are found, for example, only
twenty-one times in the Nala, eight in the Hitopadeśa, seven in Manu, six
each in the Bhagavad-Gītā and Śakuntalā, and sixty-six times, from fourteen roots, in the first book, of about 2600 lines, of the Rāmāyaṇa: compare 927 b), and it possesses no participle, nor any modes (excepting in
the prohibitive use of its augmentless forms: see 579; and the so-called
precative: see 921 ff.); in the older language, on the other hand, it is
quite common, and has the whole variety of modes belonging to the present,
and sometimes participles. Its description, accordingly, must be given
mainly as that of a part of the older language, with due notice of its restriction in later use.
827. a. In the RV., nearly half the roots occurring show aorist forms,
of one or another class; in the AV., rather less than one third; and in the
other texts of the older language comparatively few aorists occur which are
not found in these two.
b. More than fifty roots, in RV. and AV. together, make aorist forms
of more than one class (not taking into account the reduplicated or "causative" aorist); but no law appears to underlie this variety; of any relation
such as is taught by the grammarians, between active of one class and
middle of another as correlative, there is no trace discoverable.
c. Examples are: of classes 1 and 4, adhām and dhāsus from
√dhā, ayuji and ayukṣata from √yuj; — of 1 and 5, agrabham and
agrabhīṣma from √grabh, mṛṣṭhās and marṣiṣṭhās from √mṛṣ; —
of 1 and 2, ārta and ārat from √ṛ; — of 2 and 4, avidam and avitsi
from √vid find, anijam and anāikṣīt from √nij; — of 2 and 5, sané¬
ma and asāniṣam from √san; — of 2 and 7, aruham and arukṣat
from √ruh; — of 4 and 5, amatsus and amādiṣus from √mad; —
of 4 and 6, hāsmahi and hāsiṣus from √hā; — of 1 and 2 and 4,
atnata and atanat and atān from √tan; — of 1 and 4 and 5, abudh¬
ran and ábhutsi and bódhiṣat from √budh, ástar and stṛṣīya and
299 I. ROOT-AORIST. [--831
astarīs from √stṛ. Often the second, or second and third, class is represented by only an isolated form or two.
I. Simple Aorist.
828. This is, of the three principal divisions of aorist, the one
least removed from the analogy of forms already explained; it is
like an imperfect, of the root-class or of the á-class, without a corresponding present indicative, but with (more or less fragmentarily) all
the other parts which go to make up a complete present-system.
1. Root-aorist.
829. a. This formation is in the later language limited
to a few roots in -~f ā and the root H bhū, and is allowed
to be made in the active only, the middle using instead
the s-aorist (4), or the iṣ-aorist (5).
b. The roots in m ā take 3FMis as 3d pi. ending, and,
as usual, lose their m ā before it; *TJbhū (as in the perfect:
793 a) retains its vowel unchanged throughout, inserting
5pv after it before the endings -~T^am and ER^an of 1st
sing, and 3d pi. Thus:
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i 5RJīī -SfWT Wfà
ádām ádāva ádāma ábhūvam àbhūva ábhūma
ádās ádātam ádāta ábhūs ábhūtam ábhūta
àdāt ádātām ádus ábhūt ábhūtām ábhūvan
For the classical Sanskrit, this is the whole story.
830. In the Veda, these same roots are decidedly the most frequent and conspicuous representatives of the formation: especially
the roots gā, dā, dhā, pā drink, sthā, bhū; while sporadic forms
are made from jñā, prā, sā, hā. As to their middle forms, see below, 834 a.
a. Instead of abhūvam, RV. has twice abhuvam. BhP. has agan,
3d pi., instead of agus.
831. But aorists of the same class are also made from a number of roots in ṛ, and a few in i- and u-vowels (short or long) —
831—] X I . AORIST-SYSTEMS. 300
with, as required by the analogy of the tense with an imperfect of
the root-class, guṇa-strengthening in the three persons of the singular.
a. Thus (in the active), from √śru, áśravam and áśrot; from
√śri, áśres and áśret; from √kṛ make, ákaram and ákar (for akars
and akart); from vṛ enclose, ā́var(585a); and so ástar, aspar. Dual
and plural forms are much less frequent than singular; but for the most
part they also show an irregular strengthening of the root-vowel: thus
(including augmentless forms), ákarma and karma and ákarta, vartam,
spartam, áhema and áhetona, bhema, aśravan; regular are only
avran, ákran, ahyan, and áśriyan.
832. Further, from a few roots with medial (or initial) vowel
capable of guṇa-strengthening and having in general that strengthening only in the singular.
a. Thus, ábhedam and abhet from √bhid; ámok from √muc;
yojam from √yuj; rok (VS.) from √ruj; arodham and arudhma from
√rudh; avart from √vṛt; várk from √vṛj (AV. has once avṛk); adar¬
śam from √dṛś; ā́rdhma from √ṛdh; and adṛśan, avṛjan, aśvitan.
But chedma, with guṇa, from √chid, and adarśma (TS.) from √dṛś.
833. Again, from a larger number of roots with a as radical
vowel:
a. Of these, gam (with n for m whenfinalor followed by m: 143 a,
212 a) is of decidedly most frequent occurrence, and shows the greatest
variety of forms: thus, ágamam, ágan (2d and 3d sing.), áganma,
aganta (strong form), ágman. The other cases are akran from √kram;
átan from √tan; abhrāṭ from √bhrāj; askan from √skand; asrat
from √sraṃs (? VS.); dhak and daghma from √dagh; ā́naṭ (585a)
and anaṣṭām from √naś; ághas or aghat, ághastām, aghasta, and
ákṣan (for aghsan, like agman) from √ghas; and the 3d pll. in us,
ákramus, ayamus, dabhús, nṛtus (pf.?), mandús.
834. So far only active forms have been considered. In the
middle, a considerable part of the forms are such as are held by the
grammarians (881) to belong to the s-aorist, with omission of the
s: they doubtless belong, however, mostly or altogether, here. Thus:
a. From roots ending in vowels, we have adhithās, adhita (also
ahita), and adhīmahi; adithās, adita, and adimahi (and adīmahi
from √dā cut); áśīta (?); sīmáhi; ásthithās and ásthita and ásthiran,
forms of ā-roots; — of ṛ-roots, akri, ákṛthās, ákṛta, akrātām, ákrata
(and the anomalous kránta); avri, avṛthās, avṛta; ārta, ārata; mṛthās,
amṛta; dhṛthās; adṛthās; astṛta; ahṛthās; gūrta; — of i and u
roots, the only examples are ahvi (? AV., once), áhūmahi, and áci¬
dhvam. The absence of any analogies whatever for the omission of a s in
such forms, and the occurrence of avri and akri and ákrata, show that
their reference to the s-aorist is probably without sufficient reason.
b. As regards roots ending in consonants, the case is more questionable, since loss of s after a final consonant before thās and ta (and, of
3 0 1 I. ROOT-AORIST. [-836
course, dhvam) would be in many cases required by euphonic rule (233 c
ff.). We find, however, such unmistakable middle inflection of the rootaorist as ayuji, áyukthās, áyukta, ayujmahi, áyugdhvam, áyujran;
ā́ṣṭa and ā́śata; náṃśi; apadi (1st sing.) and apadmahi and apadran;
ámanmahi; gánvahi and áganmahi and ágmata; atnata; ájani
(1st sing.) and ajñata (3d pl,); from √gam are made agathās and agata,
from √tan, atathās and átata, and from √man, amata, with treatment
of the final like that of han in present inflection (637). The ending ran
is especially frequent in 3d pi., being taken by a number of verbs which
have no other middle person of this aorist: thus, agṛbhran, ásṛgran,
adṛśran, abudhran, ávṛtran, ajuṣran, akṛpran, aspṛdhran, avas¬
ran, áviśran; and ram is found beside ran in ádṛśram, ábudhram,
ásṛgram.
c. From roots of which the final would combine with s to kṣ, it
seems more probable that aorist-forms showing k (instead of ṣ) before the
ending belong to the root-aorist: such are amukthās (and ámugdhvam),
apṛkthās and apṛkta, ábhakta, avṛkta, asakthās and asakta, rik¬
thās, vikthās and vikta, arukta; apraṣṭa, ayaṣṭa, áspaṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās
and ásṛṣṭa, and mṛṣṭhās would be the same in either case.
d. There remain, as cases of more doubtful belonging, and probably
to be ranked in part with the one formation and in part with the other,
according to their period and to the occurrence of other persons: chitthās,
nutthā́s and ánutta and ánuddhvam, patthās, bhitthās, amatta,
atapthās, alipta, asṛpta; and finally, árabdha, alabdha, aruddha,
abuddha, ayuddha, and drogdhās (MBh.: read drugdhās): see 883.
Modes of the Root-aorist.
835. Subjunctive. In subjunctive use, forms identical with the
augmentless indicative of this aorist are much more frequent than the more
proper subjunctives. Those to which no corresponding form with augment
occurs have been given above; the others it is unnecessary to report in
detail.
836. a. Of true subjunctives the forms with primary endings are
quite few. .In the active, kárāṇi, gāni, gamāni (for bhuvāni, see below, c); kárasi; sthāti, dā́ti and dhā́ti (which are almost indicative in
value), karati, joṣati, padāti, bhédati, rādhati, varjati; sthāthas,
karathas and karatas, darśathas, śravathas and śrávatas; and
(apparently) karanti, gámanti. In the middle, joṣase; idhaté (?),
kárate, bhójate, yojate, várjate; dhéthe and dhāithe; karāmahe^
dhāmahe, gámāmahāI.
b. Forms with secondary endings are, in the active, dárśam, bho¬
jam, yojam; káras, tárdas, páreas, yámas, rādhās, váras; karat*
gámat, garat, jóṣat, daghat, padāt, yamat, yodhat, rādhat, várat,
vártat, śrávat, saghat,spárat; kárāma, gamāma, rādhāma; gáman,
836—] X I . AORIST-SYSTEMS. 302
garan, dárśan, yaman. No middle forms are classifiable with confidence here.
c. The series bhuvam, bhúvas, bhúvat, bhúvan, and bhuvāni
(compare abhuvam: 830 a), and the isolated śrúvat, are of doubtful
belongings; with a different accent, they would seem to be of the next
class; here, a guṇa-strengthening would be more regular (but note the absence of guṇa in the aorist indicative and the perfect of √bhū).
837. Optative. The optative active of this aorist constitutes, with
a s interposed between mode-sign and personal endings (567), the preca¬
tive active of the Hindu grammarians, and is allowed by them to be made
from every verb, they recognizing no connection between it and the aorist.
But in the 2d sing, the interposed s is not distinguishable from the personal ending; and, after the eariiest period (see 838), the ending crowds
out the sibilant in the 3d sing., which thus comes to end in yāt instead
of yās (compare 555 a),
a. In the older language, however, pure optative forms, without the
s, are made from this tense. From roots in ā occur (with change of ā to
e before the y: 250d) deyām, dheyām and dheyus, and stheyāma;
in u-vowels, bhūyā́ma; in ṛ, kriyāma; in consonants, aśyā́m and
aśyā́ma and aśyus, vṛjyām, śakyām, yujyāva and yujyā́tām, sāhyā¬
ma, and tṛdyus.
b. The optative middle of the root-aorist is not recognized by the
Hindu grammarians as making a part of the precative formation. The RV.
has, however, two precative forms of it, namely padīṣṭá and mucīṣṭa.
Much more common in the older language are pure optative forms: namely,
aśīya and aśīmáhi (this optative is especially common), indhīya, gmī¬
ya, murīya, rucīya; arīta, uhīta, vurīta; idhīmahi, naśīmahi,
nasīmahi, pṛcīmahi, mudīmahi, yamīmahi; and probably, from ā¬
roots, sīmáhi and dhīmahi (which might also be augmentless indicative,
since adhīmahi and adhītām also occur). All these forms except the
three in 3d sing, might be precative according to the general understanding of that mode, as being of persons which even by the native authorities
are not claimed ever to exhibit the inserted sibilant.
838« Precative active forms of this aorist are made from the earliest
period of the language. In RV., they do not occur from any root which
has not also other aorist forms of the same class to show. The RV. forms
are: 1st sing., bhūyāsam; 2d sing., avyās, jñeyās, bhūyā́s, mṛdhyās,
sahyās; 3d sing, (in -yās, for -yāst; RV. has no 3d sing, in yāt, which
is later the universal ending), avyās, aśyās, ṛdhyās, gamyā́s, daghyās,
peyās, bhūyā́s, yamyās, yūyās, vṛjyās, śrūyās, sahyās; 1st pl.,
kriyāsma (beside kriyāma: 837 a). A V. has six 1st persons sing, in
-yā́sam, one 2d in -yā́s, one 3d in -yāt (and one in -yās, in a RV.
passage), three 1st pl. in -yā́sma (beside one in yāma, in a RV. passage),
and the 2d bhūyāstha (doubtless a false reading: TB. has -sta in the
corresponding passage). From this time on, the pure optative forms nearly
303 I. ROOT-AORIST. [—840
disappear (the exceptions are given in 837 a). But the precative forms are
nowhere common, excepting as made from √bhū; and from no other Toot
is anything like a complete series of persons quotable (only bhūyāsva
and bhūyāstām being wanting; and these two persons have no representative from any root). All together, active optative or precative forms are
made in the older language from over fifty roots; and the epic and classical texts add them from hardly a dozen more: see further 925.
839. Imperative. Imperative forms of the root-aorist are not rare
in the early language. In the middle, indeed, almost only the 2d sing,
occurs: it is accented either regularly, on the ending, as kṛṣvá, dhiṣvá,
yukṣvá, or on the root, as mátsva, yákṣva, váṃsva, rā́sva, sákṣva;
dīṣva and māsva are not found with accent; the 2d pl. is represented
by kṛdhvam, voḍhvam. In the active, all the persons (2d and 3d) are
found in use; examples are: 2d sing., kṛdhí, vṛdhi, śagdhí, śrudhí,
gadhi, yaṁdhí, gahi, māhi, sāhi, mogdhi; 3d sing., gaṁtu, dātu,
aṣṭu, śrótu, sótu; 2d du., dātam, jitam, śaktam, śrutám, bhūtám,
spṛtám, gatám, riktám, voḍham, sitam, sutam; 3d du., only gaṁ¬
tām, dātām, voḍhā́m; 2d pl., gātá, bhūtá, śruta, kṛta, gata, dāta,
dhātana; 3d pl., only dhantu, śruvantu. These are the most regular
forms; but irregularities as to both accent and strengthening are not infrequent. Thus, strong forms in 2d du. and pl. are yaṁtám, varktam,
vartam; kárta, gáṁta (once gaṁtá), yaṁta, vartta, heta, śróta, sóta;
and, with tana, kártana, gáṁtana, yaṁtana, sotana, and the irregular
dhetana (√dhā); in 3d du., gāṁtām. Much more irregular are yódhi
(instead of yuddhi) from √yudh, and bodhi from both √budh and
√bhū (instead of buddhi and bhūdhí). A single form (3d sing.) in
tāt is found, namely śastāt. We find kṛdhi also later (MBh. BhP.).
a. As to 2d persons singular in si from the simple root used in an
imperative sense, see above, 624.
Participles of the Root-aorist.
840. In the oldest language, of the RV., are found a number
of participles which must be reckoned as belonging to this formation.
a. In the active, they are extremely few: namely, kránt, citánt (?),
gmánt, sthā́nt, bhidánt, vṛdhánt, dyutant- (only in composition),
and probably ṛdhánt. And BhP. has mṛṣant (but probably by error, for
mṛṣyant).
b. In the middle, they are in RV.much more numerous. The accent
is usually on the final of the stem: thus, arāṇá, idhāná, krāṇá, juṣ¬
āṇá, tṛṣāṇá, nidāná, piśāná, pṛcāná, prathāná, budhāná, bhiyāná,
manāná, mondāná, yujāná, rucāná, vipāná, vrāṇá, urāṇá, śubh¬
āná, sacāná, suvāná or svāná, sṛjāná, spṛdhāná, hiyāná; — but
sometimes on the root-syllable: thus, cítāna, cyávāna,rúhāṇa, úhāna
(pres.?), vásāna, śúmbhāna; — while a few show both accentuations
840—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 304
(compare 619 d): thus, dṛśāná and dṛ́śāna, dyutāná and dyútāna,
yatāná and yátāna; and cetāna and hrayāṇa occur only in composition.
A very few of these are found once or twice in other texts, namely ci¬
tāna, dyutāna, ruhāṇa, vasāna, suvāna; and -kupāna occurs once
in Āpast. (xiv. 28.4).
841. All together, the roots exhibiting in the older language
forms which are with fair probability to be reckoned to the rootaorist-system are about a hundred and thirty; over eighty of them
make such forms in the RV.
Passive Aorist third person singular.
842. A middle third person singular, of peculiar formation and
prevailingly passive meaning, is made from many verbs in the older
language, and has become a regular part of the passive conjugation,
being, according to the grammarians, to be substituted always for the
proper third person of any aorist middle that is used in a passive
sense.
843. This person is formed by adding ^ i to the root,
which takes also the augment, and is usually strengthened.
a. The ending i belongs elsewhere only to the first person; and this
third person apparently stands in the same relation to a first in i as do,
in the middle voice, the regular 3d sing, perfect, and also the frequent
Vedic 3d sing, present of the root-class (613), which are identical in form
with their respective first persons. That a fuller ending has been lost off
is extremely improbable •, and hence, as an aorist formation from the simple
root, this is most properly treated here, in connection with the ordinary
root-aorist.
844. Before the ending ^ i, a final vowel, and usually
also a medial -5f a before a single consonant, have the vṛddhistrengthening; other medial vowels have the guṇa-strength¬
ening if capable of it (240); after final 5TT ā is added ET^y.
a. Examples (all of them quotable from the older language) are:
from Toots ending in ā, ájñāyi, ádhāyi, ápāyi; in other vowels, áśrāyi,
ástāvi, áhāvi, ákāri, ástāri; — from roots with medial i, u, ṛ, aceti,
ácchedi, aśeṣi, ábodhi, ámoci, áyoji, ádarśi, asarji, varhi; from
roots with medial a strengthened, agāmi, ápādi, ayami, avāci, vāpi,
ásādi (these are all the earlier cases); with a unchanged, only ájani
(and RV. has once jā́ni), and, in heavy syllables, ámyakṣi, vandi,
śaṃsi, syandi; with medial ā, ábhrāji, árādhi; — from roots with
initial vowel, ārdhi (only case).
b. According to the grammarians, certain Toots in am, and √vadh,
retain the a unchanged: quotable are ajani (or ajāni), agami (or agāmi),
305 SIMPLE AORIST : 2. a-AORiST. [-846
asvani, avadhi, also araci; and there are noted besides, from roots
sometimes showing a nasal, adaṃśi, arambhi, arandhi, ajambhi,
abhañji or abhāji, alambhi (always, with prepositions) or alābhi,
astambhi; ŚB. has asañji.
c. Augmentless forms, as in all other like cases, are met with, with
either indicative or subjunctive value: examples (besides the two or three
already given) are: dhā́yi, śrā́vi, bhāri, reci, védi, roci, jáni, pā́di,
sā́di, ardhi. The accent, when present, is always on the root-syllable
(SV. dhāyí is doubtless a false reading).
845. These forms are made in RV. from forty roots, and all the other
earlier texts combined add only about twenty to the number; from the
later language are quotable thirty or forty more; in the epics they are
nearly unknown. When they come from roots of neuter meaning, as gam,
pad, sad, bhrāj, rādh, rue, sañj, they have (like the so-called passive
participle in ta: 952) a value equivalent to that of other middle forms;
in a case or two (RV. vii. 73. 3 [?]; VS. xxviii. 15; TB. n. 6.102) they
appear even to be used transitively.
2. The a-aorist.
846. a. This aorist is in the later language allowed to
be made from a large number of roots (near a hundred).
It is made in both voices, but is rare in the middle, most
of the roots forming their middle according to the s-class
(878 ff.) or the is-class (898 ff.).
b. Its closest analogy is with the imperfect of the
a-class (751 ff.); its inflection is the same with that in all
particulars; and it takes in general a weak form of root —
save the roots in ‡Jṛ (three or four only), which have the
guṇa-strengthening.
c. As example of inflection may be taken the root
ÍH~ sic pour. Thus:
active. middle.
s. d. p. s. d, p.
1 yfc w yfi-WM Erfīī"íīī 5iīīīiì yfĪHMÍ^ -MÍĪMWÍ-fe
ásicam ásicāva ásicāma ásice ásicāvahi ásicāmahi
2
3^fem yTVHHH^ 3W"T yfà-^l ^ MÍīfīl8IIH^ ^fe ^
ásicas ásicatam ásicata ásicathās ásicethām ásicadhvam
ásicat ásicatām ásican ásicata ásicetām ásicanta
847—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 306
847. The a-aorist makes in the RV. a small--figure beside the rootaorist, being represented by less than half the latter's number of roots. It
becomes, however, more common later (it is the only form of aorist which
is made from more verbs in AV. than in RV.); and in Veda and Brāhmaṇa
together about eighty roots exhibit the formation more or less fully. Of
these a large number (fully half) are of the type of the roots which make
their present-system according to the a-class, having a vowel capable of
guṇa-strengthening before a final consonant (754): thus, with i , chid,
bhid, nij, ric, riṣ, lip, vid, lśiṣ (śās), 2 śiṣ, śriṣ, śliṣ, sic, sridh;
— with u, krudh, kṣudh, guh, duṣ, dyut, druh, puṣ, budh, bhuj,
muc, mruc, yuj, ruc, rud, rudh, muh, ruh, śuc; — with ṛ, ṛdh,
kṛt, gṛdh, gṛh, tṛp, tṛṣ, tṛh, dṛp, dṛś, dhṛṣ, nṛt, mṛdh, mṛṣ, vṛt,
vṛdh, vṛṣ, sṛp, hṛṣ. A small number end in vowels: thus, ṛ, kṛ, sṛ
(which have the guṇa-strengthening throughout), hi (? ahyat once in
AV.), and several in ā, apparent transfers from the root-class by the weakening of their ā to a: thus, khyā, hvā, vyā, śvā, and dā and dhā;
and āsthat, regarded by the grammarians as aorist to √as throw, is doubtless a like formation from √sthā. A few have a penultimate nasal in the
present and elsewhere, which in this aorist is lost: thus, bhraṃś, taṃs,
dhvaṃs, sraṃs, krand, randh. Of less classifiable character are aś,
kram, gam, ghas, tam, śam, śram, tan, san, sad, āp, das, yas,
śak, dagh. The roots pat, naś, vac form the tense-stems papta, neśa,
voca, of which the first is palpably and the other two are probably the
result of reduplication; but the language has lost the sense of their being
such, and makes other reduplicated aorists from the same roots (see below, 854).
a. Many of these aorists are simply transfers of the root-aorist to an
a-inflection. Conspicuous examples are akarat etc. and agamat etc. (in
the earliest period only akar and agan).
848. The inflection of this aorist is in general so regular that it will
be sufficient to give only examples of its Vedic forms. We may take as
model avidam, from √vid find, of which the various persons and modes
are more frequent and in fuller variety than those of any other verb. Only
the forms actually quotable are instanced; those of which the examples
found are from other verbs than vid are bracketed. Thus:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 ávidam ávidāva ávidāma ávide [ávidāvahi] ávidāmahi
2 ávidas [ávidata] [ávidathās]
3 ávidat ávidan [avidata] [avidetām] ávidanta
a. The middle forms are rare in the earlier language, as in the later:
we have áhve etc., ákhye etc., ávide (?) and avidanta, avocathās
and avocāvahi (and avidāmahe GB. and asicāmahe KB. are doubtless to be amended to -mahi).
307 SIMPL E AORIST : 2. a-AORiST. [—853
b. Augmentless forms, with indicative or subjunctive value, are not
infrequent. Examples, showing accent on the tense-sign, according to the
general analogies of the formation, are: ruhám, sṛpas, bhuját, vidát,
aratām, vocata, śakan; vidata and vyáta (3d sing.), arāmahi,
śiṣāmahi, vidánta, budhánta, mṛṣanta (for exceptions as regards
accent, see below, 853),
Modes of the a-aorist.
849. The subjunctive forms of this aorist are few; those which occur
are instanced below, in the method which was followed for the indicative:
a. The ending thana is found once, in riṣāthana. Of middle forms
occur only śíṣātāi (AV. : but doubtless misreading for śíṣyātāi) and
śiṣāmahe (AV., for RV. śiṣāmahi). The form sádathas seems an indicative, made from a secondary present-stem.
850. The optatives are few in the oldest language, but become more
frequent, and in the Brāhmaṇas are not rare. Examples are: in active,
bhideyam, vidéyam, sanéyam (TB. once sanem); vidés, games;
gamet, vocet; gametam; gaméma, śakéma, sanéma; vareta; in
middle, (only) videya; gamemahi, vanemahi: ruhethās etc. in the
epics must be viewed rather as present forms of the á-class.
a. A single middle precative form occurs, namely videṣṭa (AV.,
once); it is so isolated that how much may be inferred from it is very
questionable.
851. A complete series of active imperative forms are made from
√sad (including sadatana, 2d pl.), and the middle sadantām. Other
imperatives are very rare: namely, sána, sára, ruha, vidá; ruhátam,
vidátam; khyáta. TS. has once vṛdhātu (compare 740).
852. a. The active participles tṛpánt, ríṣant or rī́ṣant, vṛdhánt,
śiṣánt, śucánt, sádant, and (in participial compounds, 1309) kṛtant-,
guhant-, vidant- (all RV,), are to be assigned with plausibility to this
aorist.
b. Likewise the middle participles guhámāna, dhṛṣámāṇa, dása¬
māna (?), nṛtámāna, śucámāna, and perhaps vṛdhāná, sridhāná.
853. A few irregularities and peculiarities may be noticed here.
The roots in ṛ, which (847) show a strengthening like that of the
l
2
3
[vidā́va] vidāma
vidāthas vidātha
[vidātāi?]
Participles of the a-aorist.
Irregularities of the a-aorist.
vidā́si
vidā́s
vidā́t
[vidāmahe]
853—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 308
present of the unaccented a-class, have likewise the accent upon the
radical syllable, like that class: thus, from √ṛ, áranta (augmentless 3d
pl.), sárat and sára. The root sad follows the same rule: thus, sáda¬
tam; and from √san are found sánas and sànat and sánema and
sána, beside sanéyam and sanéma. It is questionable whether these
are not true analogues of the bhū-class (unaccented a-class) present-system.
On the other hand, ruhat (beside ruhám, ruhā́va, ruhátam), śíṣat
and śíṣātāi (?), and ríṣant or rī́sant are more isolated cases. In view
of such as these, the forms from the stem bhúva and śrúva (836 c)
are perhaps to be referred hither. From √vac, the optative is accented
vocéyam, voces, vocéma, vocéyus; elsewhere the accent is on the rootsyllable: thus, voce, vócat, vócati, vócanta.
854. a. The stem voc has in Vedic use well-nigh assumed the
value of a root; its forms are very various and of frequent use, in RV.
especially far outnumbering in occurrences all other forms from √vac.
Besides those already given, we find vocā (1st sing, impv.) and vocāti,
vocāvahāi; voces, voceya, vocemahi; vocatat (2d sing.), vocatu,
vocatam, vocata.
b. Of the stem neśa from √naś only neśat occurs,
e. The root śās (as in some of its present forms: 639) is weakened
to śiṣ, and makes aśiṣam.
855. Isolated forms which have more or less completely the
aspect of indicative presents are made in the oldest language from
some roots beside the aorist-systems of the first two classes. It must
be left for maturer research to determine how far they may be relics
of original presents, and how far recent productions, made in the
way of conversion of the aorist-stem to a root in value.
a. Such forms are the following: from √kṛ make, kárṣi, kṛthas,
kṛtha, kṛṣe; from √gam, gathá; from √ci gather, ceti; from √dā
give, dā́ti, dātu; from √dhā put, dhāti; from √pā drink, pāthás,
pānti; from √bhṛ, bharti; from √muc, mucánti; from √rudh, rudh¬
mas (?); from √vṛt, vartti.
II. (3) Reduplicated Aorist.
856. The reduplicated aorist is different from the other
forms of aorist in that it has come to be attached in almost
all cases to the derivative (causative etc.) conjugation in
W ī áya, as the aorist of that conjugation, and is therefore
liable to be made from all roots which have such a conjugation, beside the aorist or aorists which belong to their
primary conjugation. Since, however, the connection of
309 3. REDUPLICATED AORIST. [—859
the two is not a formal one (the aorist being made directly
from the root, and not from the causative stem), but rather
a matter of established association, owing to kinship of
meaning, the formation and inflection of this kind of aorist is best treated here, along with the others.
857. Its characteristic is a reduplication of the radical
syllable, by which it is assimilated, on the one hand, to
the imperfect of the reduplicating class (656 ff.), and, on the
other hand, to the so-called pluperfect (817 ff). But the
aorist reduplication has taken on a quite peculiar character,
with few traces left even in the Veda of a different condition which may have preceded this.
858. a. As regards, indeed, the consonant of the reduplication, it follows the general rules already given (590).
And the quality of the reduplicated vowel is in general as
in the formations already treated: it needs only to be noted
that an a-vowel and ṛ (or ar) aTe usually (for exceptions,
see below, 860) repeated by an i-vowel — as they are, to a
considerable extent, in the reduplicated present also (660).
b. But in regard to quantity, this aorist aims always at
establishing a diversity between the reduplicating and radical syllables, making the one heavy and the other light.
And the preference is very markedly for a heavy reduplication and a light root-syllable — which relation is brought
about wherever the conditions allow. Thus:
859. If the root is a light syllable (having a short
vowel followed by a single consonant), the reduplication is
made heavy.
a. And this, usually by lengthening the reduplicating vowel,
with ī for radical a or r or 1 (in the single root containing that vowel): thus, arīriṣam, adūduṣam, ajījanam, avīvṛdham, acīklpam.
The great majority of reduplicated aorists are of this form.
b. If, however, the root begins with two consonants, so that the
reduplicating syllable will be heavy whatever the quantity ofits vow-
859—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 310
el, the vowel remains short: thus, acikṣipam, acukrudham, ati¬
trasam, apispṛśam.
860. If the root is a heavy syllable (having a long
vowel, or a short before two consonants), the vowel of the
reduplication is short: and in this case 5f a or EfT a, and
ṛ (if it occurs), are reduplicated by a.
a. Thus, adidīkṣam, abubhūṣam (not quotable), adadokṣam,
adadhāvam, atataṃsam. And, in the cases in which a root should
both begin and end with two consonants, both syllables would be
necessarily heavy, notwithstanding the short vowel in the former:
thus, apapraccham, acaskandam (but no such forms are found in use).
b. A medial ṛ is allowed by the grammarians to retain the strengthening of the causative stem, together with, of course, reduplication by a:
thus, acakarṣat, avavartat (beside acīkṛṣat, avīvṛtat); but no such
forms have been met with in use.
c. These aorists are not distinguishable in form from the so-called
pluperfects (817ff.).
861. a. In order, however, to bring about the favored relation
of heavy redupliéation and light radical syllable, a heavy root is
sometimes made light: either by shortening its vowel, as in arīradham
from √rādh, avīvaśam from √vāś, asīṣadham from √sādh, ajījivam
from √jīv, adīdipam (K. and later: RV. has didīpas) from √dīp,
abībhiṣam from √bhīṣ, asūsucam from √sūc; or by dropping a
penultimate nasal, as in acikradam from √krand, asiṣyadam from
√syand.
b. In those cases in which (1047) an aorist is formed directly
from a causal stem in āp, the ā is abbreviated to i: thus, atiṣṭhip¬
am etc, ajijñipat (but KSS. ajijñapat), jīhipas, ajījipata (but
VS. ajījapata); but from śrap comes aśiśrapāma (ŚB.).
862. Examples of this aorist from roots with initial vowel are very
rare; the older language has only āmamat (or amamat) from √am,
āpipan (ŚB.: BAU. āpipipat) from √āp, and arpipam (augmentless)
from the causative stem arp of √ṛ — in which latter the root is excessively abbreviated. The grammarians give other similar formations, as ārci¬
cam from √arc, āubjijam from √ubj, ārjiham from √arh, āicikṣam
from √īkṣ, ārdidham from √ṛdh. Compare the similar reduplication in
desiderative stems: 1029b.
863. Ofspecial irregularities may be mentioned:
a. From √dyut is made (V.B.) the stem didyuta, taking its reduplicating vowel from the radical semivowel. From √gup, instead of jūgu¬
pa (B.S.), JB. has jugūpa, and some texts (B.S.) have jugupa; and
jīhvara (B.) is met with beside the regular jihvara (V.B.), In caccha-
311 3. REDUPLICATED AORIST. [—867
da (Nir.), and the more or less doubtful paprátha and śaśvacá and
sasvaja (RV.) we have a instead of i in the reduplication.
b. In support of their false view of this aorist as made from the
causative stem instead of directly from the root, the native grammarians
teach that roots ending in an u-vowel may reduplicate with i, as representing the ā of the strengthened stem: thus, bībhava from bhāv-aya‚
as well as būbhuva from bhū. No example of such a formation, however,
is met with except ápiplavam (ŚB., once); against it we find dudruva,
būbhuva, rūruva, śuśruva, and others.
c. As to apaptam, avocam, and aneśam, see above, 847.
864. The inflection of the reduplicated aorist is like
that of an imperfect of the second general conjugation: that
is to say, it has ^ a as final stem-vowel, with all the peculiarities which the presence of that vowel conditions
(733 a). Thus, from √5FTJan give birth (stem jījana):
active. middle,
s. d, p. s. d. p.
1 MsíìsHH^ «síìsHI-T ^fteRTīī 3sxxTCT^ **íìsMWÍ^
ájījanam ájījanāva ájījanāma ájījane ájījanāvahi ájījanāmahi
2 mtsm ^fìwFT mm^ mmviw miswm mìwm
ájījanas ájījanatam ájījanata ájījanathās ájījanethām ájījanadhvam
3 ^īīfeP"T «síìsMHIH mtxFR Ä i ī *-feflsMHIH mmrī
ájījanat ájījanatām ájījanan ájījanata ájījanetām ájījananta
865. The middle forms are rare in the older language (the 3d
pl. is decidedly the most common of them, being made from eleven
roots; the 3d s. from seven); but all, both active and middle, are
quotable except 1st and 2d du. middle and 1st du. active.
a. Atītape appears to be once used (RV.) as 3d sing., with passive sense.
866. A final ṛ has the guṇa-strengthening before the endings :
thus, acīkarat, apīparam, atītaras, dīdaras, adīdharat, amīmarat,
avīvaran, jihvaras. Of similar strengthened formsfrom ī and u-roots
are found apiprayan (TS.), abībhayanta (RV.), apiplavam (ŚB.),
acucyavat (K,), aśuśravat (MS.), atuṣṭavam (RV.). Not many
roots ending in other vowelsthan ṛ make this aorist: see below, 868.
867. Forms of the inflection without union-vowel are occasionally
met with: namely, from roots ending in consonants, síṣvap (2d sing.,
augmentless) from √svap, and aśiśnat from √śnath; from roots in ṛ
or ar, dīdhar (2d sing.), and ajīgar (2d and 3d sing.); for roots in iand u-vowels, see 868. Of 3d pl. in us are found almost only a form
867—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 312
or two from i- and u-roots, with guṇa before the ending: thus, aśiśrayus,
ácucyavus, aśuśravus, asuṣavus; but also abībhajus (ŚB.), and
nīnaśus (MBh.).
868. In the later language, a few roots are said by the grammarians to make this aorist as a part of their primary conjugation:
they are śri and śvi‚ dru and sru, kam, and dhā suck (śvi and dhā
optionally).
a. In the older language are found from √śri aśiśret and aśiś¬
rayus (noticed in the preceding paragraph") and aśiśriyat (ŚB.); from
√dru, adudrot and adudruvat (TB.: not used as aorist); from √sru,
asusrot and (augmentless) susros and susrot; from √kam, acīka¬
metām and -manta (B.S.). Of forms analogous with these occur a number
from roots in u or ū: thus, anūnot and nūnot from √nu; yūyot from
√yu separate; dūdhot from √dhū; apupot from √pū; tūtos and
tūtot from √tu; asuṣot from √sū; — and one or two from roots in i
or ī: thus, siṣet from √si (or sā) bind; amīmet from √mā bellow;
apipres (with apiprayan, noticed above) from √prī (and the "imperfects" from dīdhī etc, 676, are of corresponding form). And from √cyu
are made, with union-vowel ī, acucyavīt and acucyavītana. Few of
these forms possess a necessarily causative or a decidedly aoristic value,
and it is very doubtful whether they should not be assigned to the perfectsystem.
b. From the later language are quotable only aśiśriyat etc. (3d pl.,
-yan or -yus) and adudruvat.
Modes of the Reduplicated Aorist.
869. a. As in other preterit formations, the augmentless indicative persons ofthis aorist are used subjunctively, and they are
very much more frequent than true subjunctives.
b. Of the latter are found only rīradhā (1st sing.); tītapāsi;
cīklpāti and sīṣadhāti, and pispṛśati (as if corresponding to an indicative apispṛk, like aśiśnat); and perhaps the 1st sing. mid. śaśvacāí.
c. The augmentless indicative forms are accented in general on the
reduplication: thus, dī́dharas, nī́naśas; jī́janat, pī́parat; jī́janan;
also síṣvap; but, on the other hand, we have also pīpárat, śiśráthas
and śiśnáthat, and dudrávat and tuṣṭávat (which may perhaps belong
to the perfect: compare 810). According to the native grammarians, the
accent rests either on the radical syllable or on the one that follows it.
870. Optative forms are even rarer. The least questionable case is
the middle "precative" rīriṣīṣṭa (ririṣīṣṭa has been ranked above with
sāsahīṣṭa, as a perfect: 812b). Cucyuvīmahi and cucyavīrata belong either here or to the perfect-system,
871. Of imperatives, we have the indubitable forms pūpurontu and
śiśrathantu. And jigṛtám and jigṛtá, and didhṛtam and didhṛtá,
313 SIBILAN T AORIST. [—876
and jajastám (all RV. only), and perhaps suṣūdáta (AV.), are to be
referred hither, as corresponding to the indicatives (without union-vowel)
ajīgar and adīdhar: their short reduplicating vowel and their accent
assimilate them closely to the reduplicated imperfects (656 ff.), with which
we are probably to regard this aorist as ultimately related.
872. No participle is found belonging to the reduplicated aorist.
873. The number of roots from which this aorist is met with
in the earlier language is about a hundred and twenty. In the later
Sanskrit it is unusual; in the series of later texts mentioned above
(826) it occurs only twice; and it has been found quotable from hardly
fifty roots in the whole epic and classical literature.
III. Sigmatic or Sibilant Aorist.
874. a. The common tense-sign of all the varieties of
this aorist is a īī^s (convertible to \ ṣ: ISO) which is added to
the root in forming the tense-stem.
b. Thissibilant has no analogues among the class-signs of the presentsystem; but it is to be compared with that which appears (and likewise
with or without the same union-vowel i) in the stems of the future tensesystem (932ff.) and of the desiderative conjugation (1027ff.).
c. To the root thus increased the augment is prefixed
and the secondary endings are added.
875. In the case of a few roots, the sibilant tensestem (always ending in ŚT kṣ) is further increased by an ET a,
and the inflection is nearly like that of an imperfect of the
second or a- conjugation.
876. a. In the vast majority of cases, the sibilant is
the final of the tense-stem, and the inflection is like that
of an imperfect of the first or non-a-conjugation.
b. And these, again, fall into two nearly equal and
strongly marked classes, according as the sibilant is added
immediately to the final of the root, or with an auxiliary
vowel ^ i‚ making the tense-sign ^ \ i ṣ. Finally, before this
the root is in a very small number of cases increased
by a H s, making the whole addition f^TT siṣ.
877—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 314
877. We have, then, the following classification for the
varieties of sibilant-aorist:
A. With endings added directly to the sibilant:
4. with īī^s simply after the root: s-aorist;
5. with ^ i before the īī^s: iṣ-aorist;
6. the same, with īī^s at end of root: siṣ-aorist.
B. With ^ a added to the sibilant before the endings:
7. with sibilant and t% a: sa-aorist.
a. As regards the distinction between the fourth and fifth forms, it
may be said in a general way that those roots incline to take the auxiliary i in the aorist which take it also in other formations • but it is impossible to lay down any strict rules as to this accordance. Compare 903.
4. The s-aorist.
878. The tense-stem of this aorist is made by adding
H^s to the augmented root, of which also the vowel is usually strengthened.
879. The general rules as to the strengthening of the
root-vowel are these:
a. A final vowel (including ‡l ṛ) has the vṛddhi-change
in the active, and (excepting ṛ) guṇa in the middle: thus,
from ytftlead, active stem 3Eí%^anāiṣ, middle stem ER-T^aneṣ;
from √5T śru hear, tJi^m aśrāuṣ and ETSTfa aśroṣ; from
√~' kṛ make, -~Cf^akārṣ and ś(S~^akṛṣ.
b. A medial vowel has the vṛddhi-change in the active,
and remains unaltered in the middle: thus, from √xpchand
seem, active stem M'-;^> IrW^ acchants, middle stem -*5fäŚrīī^
acchants; from √Í^T^ ric leave, ^rí ^ arāikṣ and ^í(<^ arikṣ;
from √^J^rudh obstruct, M^lH arāuts and 5T~~^aruts;
from √~xT sṛj pour out, -MMM asrākṣ and 5TC-fêī asṛkṣ.
880. a. The endings are the usual secondary ones, with
3īī us (not Wl an) in 3d pi. act., and 5frT ata (not anta)
in 3d pi. mid.
315 SIBILAN T AORIST : 4. S-AORIST. [—882
b. But before īī s and cí t of 2d and 3d sing. act. is in
the later language always inserted an ^ ī, making the endings ^īīj-s and ^r^īt.
c. This insertion is unknown in the earliest language (of the RV.):
see below, 888.
881. a. Before endings beginning with t or th, the tense-sign
s is (233 c—e) omitted after the final consonant of a root — unless
this be r, or n or m (converted to anusvāra).
b. The same omission is of course made before dhvam after a consonant ; and after a vowel the sibilant is either omitted or assimilated (the
equivalence of dhv and ddhv in the theories of the grammarians and the
practice ofthe manuscripts makes it impossible to say which: 232); and
then the ending becomes ḍhvam, provided the sibilant, if retained, would
have been s (226 c): thus, astoḍhvam and avṛḍhvam (beside astoṣ¬
ata and avṛṣata); dṛḍhvam (√dṛ regard: ŚB., once), which is to
dṛthās (2d sing.) as avṛḍhvam and avṛṣata to avri and avṛthās; and
kṛḍhvam (M,).
c. According to the grammarians, the omission ofs before t and th
takes place also after a short vowel (the case can occur only in the 2dand
3d sing, mid.); but we have seen above (834a) that this is to be viewed rather as a substitution in those persons ofthe forms ofthe root-aorist.
Neither in the earlier nor in the later language, however, does any example
occur of an aorist-form with s retained after a short vowel before these
endings.
d. After the final sonant aspirate of a root, the sibilant before the
same endings is said by the Hindu grammarians to disappear altogether, the
combination of the aspirate with the th or t of the ending being then
made according to the ordinary rule for such cases (160): thus, from the
stem arāuts, for arāudh-s, is made arāuddha, as if from arāudh+ta
directly. No example ofsuch a form is quotable from the literature; but
the combination is established by the occurrence of other similar cases
(233 f). In the middle, in like manner, aruts+ta becomes aruddha,
as if from arudh+ta; but all such forms admit also of being understood
as of the root-aorist. Those that have been found to occur were given
above (834 d); probably they belong at least in part to this aorist.
e. From the three nasal roots gam, tan, man aremade the 2d and
3d sing. mid. persons agathās and agata, atathās and atata, and ama¬
ta (amathās not quotable), reckoned by the native grammarians as saorist forms, made, after loss oftheir final root-nasal, with loss also of the
sibilant after a short vowel. They are doubtless better referred to the rootaorist. But JB. has a corresponding 1st sing, atasi from √tan.
882. As examples of the inflection of this variety of
882—] X I . AORIST-SYSTEMS. 316
sibilant aorist we may take the roots nī lead, and
chid cut off. Thus:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i wm^ 3 % wffo SHWÌ % -JNfe
ánāiṣam ánāiṣva ánāiṣma áneṣi áneṣvahi áneṣmahi
ánāiṣīs ánāiṣṭam ánāiṣṭa áneṣṭhās áneṣāthām áneḍhvam
3
^qìrj ^ 5^WT^ ^f"īī ^ WTS -sfÌMIHIH^
ánāiṣīt ánāiṣṭām ánāiṣus áneṣṭa áneṣātām ánesata
active.
s. d. p.
i 5T-^rHH^ ^ r H ^%TF T
ácchāitsam ácchāitsva ácchāitsma
ácchāitsīs ácchāittam ácchāitta
3 ^c^ H ^TÌIH ^ ^fīīīī ^
ácchāitsīt ácchāittām ácchāitsus
middle.
ácchitsi ácchitsvahi ácchitsmahi
ácchitthās ácchitsāthām ácchiddhvam
3
^í^ī ī ^f^frHTcTR 4lR^rHH
àcchitta ácchitsātām ácchitsata
a. From √rudh obstruct, the 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl. act. and
the 2d and 3d sing. mid. would be árāuddham, árāuddhām,
árāuddha, áruddhās, áruddha; from √sṛj pour out, ásrāṣṭam,
ásrāṣṭām, asrāṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās, asṛṣṭa; from √dṛś see, ádrāṣṭam etc.
(as from sṛj). But from √kṛ do the same persons in the active are
ákārṣṭam, ákārṣṭām, ákārṣṭa; from √tan stretch they are átāṃstam,
átāṃstām, átāṃsta.
883.The omission ofsin the active persons(ácchāittam, ácchāit¬
tām, ácchāitta)is a case of very rare occurrence; all the quotable examples were given above (233 e). As to the like omission in middle persons,
see 881. The ChU. has twice ávāstam for avāts-tam (√vas dwell):
this may be viewed as another case of total disappearance of the sibilant,
and consequent restoration of the final radical to its original form.
317 SIBILAN T AORIST : 4. S-AORIST. [—888
884. Certain roots in ā weaken the ā in middle inflection to i
(as also in the root-aorist: above, 834 a): these are said to be stha,
dā, and dhā; in the older language have been noted ádiṣi and adiṣata
from √dā give (and adiṣi perhaps once from √dā bind), adhiṣi and
adhiṣata (with the optative dhiṣīya) from √dhā put, and asthiṣata;
also agīṣṭhās and agīṣata from √gā go (with adhi).
a. The middle inflection of the aorist of √dā would be, then,
according to the grammarians: ádiṣi, ádithās, ádita; ádiṣvohi,
ádiṣāthām, ádiṣātām; ádiṣmahi, ádiḍhvam, ádiṣata.
885. Roots ending in changeable ṛ (so-called roots in ṛ: 242) are
said by the grammarians to convert this vowel to īr in middle forms: thus,
astīrṣi, astīrṣṭhās etc. (from √stṛ); of such forms, however, has been
found in the older language only okīrṣata, PB.
886. The s-aorist is made in the older language from about a
hundred and forty roots (in RV. , from about seventy; in AV, , from
about fifty, of whichfifteenare additional to those in RV.) ; and the
epic and classical literature adds but a very small number. It has in
the Veda certain peculiarities of stem-formation and inflection, and
also the full series of modes — of which the optative middle is retained also later as a part of the "precative" (but see 925 b),
887. Irregularities of stem-formation are as follows:
a. The strengthening of the root-syllable is now and then irregularly
made or omitted: thus, ayokṣīt (AB.), chetsīs (B.S.; also occurs in
MBh., which has further yotsīs), rotsīs (KU.); amatsus (RV.); ayāṁ¬
si and arāutsi (AB.), asākṣi etc. (V.B.: √sah), māṃsta (AV.) and
māṃstām (TA.); lopsīya (U,); and MBh. has drogdhās. From √saj
is made sāṅkṣīt (U. etc.), and from √majj, amānkṣīt (not quotable).
The form ayuṅkṣmahi (BhP.) is doubtless a false reading.
b. A radical final nasal is lost in agasmahi (RV.) and gasāthām
(TA.) from √gam, and in the optatives masīya and vasīmahi (RV.)
from √√man and van.
c. The roots hū, dhū, and nū have ū instead of o in the middle:
thus, ahūsata, adhūsata, anūsi and anūṣātām and anūsata; √dhur
(or dhūrv) makes adhūrṣata.
d. ŚB. has once atrāsatām for atrāstām (√trā).
888. The principal peculiarity of the older language in regard
to inflection is the frequent absence of ī in the endings of 2d and
3d sing, act., and the consequent loss of the consonant-ending, and
sometimes of root-finals (150). The forms without I are the only ones
found in R V . and K., and they outnumber the others in A V . and
TS.; in the Brāhmaṇas they grow rarer (only one, adrāk, occursin
GB.; one, ayāṭ, in KB.; and two, adrāk and ayāṭ, in ŚB.; PB. has
none).
889—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 318
889. If the root ends in a vowel, only the consonant of the ending
is necessarily lost: thus, aprās (for both aprās–s and aprās-t) from
√prā; and in like manner ahās from √hā; — ajāis (for ajāiṣ-t) from
√ji; and in like manner acāis from √ci, and nāis (augmentless) from
√nī; — and yāus (for ayāuṣ-t) from √yu.
a. But (as in other like cases: 555 a) the ending is sometimes preserved at the expense of the tense-sign; and we have in 3d sing, ajāit (beside ajāis and ajāiṣīt) from √ji; and in like manner acāit, aśrāit,
ahāit, nāit (no examples have been noted except from roots in i and ī):
compare ayās and srās, 2d sing., 890a.
890. a. If the root (in either its simple or strengthened form) ends
in a consonant, the tense-sign is lost with the ending. Thus, abhār (for
abhārṣ-t: beside abhārṣam, abhārṣṭām) from √bhṛ; other like cases
are ahār, and (from roots in ar) akṣār, atsār, asvār, hvār. Further,
ārāik (585a: for araikṣ-t) from √ric; like cases are aśvāit from
√śvit, and (from roots with medial u) adyāut from √dyut, arāut from
√rudh, and māuk from √muc. Further, from roots ending in the palatals and h‚ aprāk from √pṛc, asrāk from √sṛj, abhāk from √bhaj,
adrāk from √dṛś, adhāk from √dah; but, with a different change of
the final, ayāṭ from √yaj, aprāṭ from √pṛch, avāṭ from √vah, and
asrāṭ from √sṛj; and (above, 146 a) srās appears to stand twice in AV.
for srāṣ-s from √sṛj; RV. has also twice ayās from √yaj. Further,
from roots ending in a nasal, atān from √tan, khān from √khan, ayān
and anān from √√yam and nam (143 a).
b. If, again, the Toots end in a double consonant, the latter of the
two is lost along with tense-sign and ending: thus, acchān (for acchānts-t;
beside acchāntta and acchāntsus) from √chand; and other like cases
are akrān, askān, and asyān.
891. A relic of this peculiarity of the older inflection has been
preserved to the later language in the 2d sing, bhāis, from √bhī.
Modes of the s-aorist.
892. The indicative forms without augment are used in a subjunctive sense, especially after mā́ prohibitive, and are not uncommon. Examples with accent, however, are extremely rare; there has
been noted only váṃsi, middle; judging from this, the tone would be
found on the radical syllable. According to the Hindu grammarians,
it may be laid on either root or ending.
893. Proper subjunctive forms are not rare in RV,, but are
markedly less common in the later Vedic texts, and very seldom met
with in the Brāhmaṇas. They are regularly made with guṇa-strengthening of the radical vowel, in both active and middle, and with accent on the root.
319 SIBILAN T AORIST : 4. S-AORIST. [—895
a. The forms with primary endings are: in active, stoṣāṇi; dar¬
ṣasi; nesati, parsati, pāsati, matsati, yoṣati, vakṣati, saksati;
dasathas, dhāsathas, pársathas, vaksathas, varsathas; pāsatas,
yaṁsatas, yaksatas, vaksatas; dhāsatha, nesatha, pársatha, mát¬
satha; — in middle, naṁsāi, máṃsāi; máṃsase; kraṁsate, trāsate,
darṣate, máṃsate, yakṣate, rāsate, vaṃsate, sākṣate, hāsate; trā́¬
sāthe (not trāsāithe, as we should rather expect); náṁsante, máṃ¬
sante: and, with the fuller ending in 3d sing., masātāi.
b. The forms with secondary endings are (active only): jéṣas, vák¬
ṣas; dárṣat, néṣat, pákṣat, pars at, préṣat, yákṣat, yóṣat, váṃsat,
vákṣat, véṣat, sátsat, chantsat, etc. (some twenty others); yakṣatām;
vàṃsāma, sā́kṣāma, stoṣāma; pars an, yaṁsan, yosan, rā́san, vak¬
ṣan, śéṣan, śróṣan. Of these, yakṣat and vakṣat are found not rarely
in the Brāhmaṇas; any others, hardly more than sporadically.
894. Of irregularities are to be noted the following:
a. The forms dṛ́kṣase and pṛkṣase (2d sing, mid.) lack the guṇastrengthening.
b. Jeṣam, stoṣam, and yoṣam (AV. yūṣam, with ū for o as in
anūṣata etc.) appear to be first persons formed under government of the
analogy of the second and third — unless they are relics of a state of
things anterior to the vṛddhi-strengthening: in which case jeṣma is to
be compared with them (we should expect jāiṣma or jeṣāma).
c. From roots in ā are made a few forms of problematic character:
namely, yeṣam (only case in RV.), khyeṣam, jñeṣam, geṣam and geṣ¬
ma, deṣma, seṣam and set, stheṣam and stheṣus. Their value is
optative. The analogy of jeṣam and jeṣma suggests the possibility of
their derivation from i-forms of the ā-roots; or the sibilant might be of
a precative character (thus, yā-ī-s-am). That they really belong to the
iṣ-aorist appears highly improbable.
d. The RV. has a few difficult first persons middle in se, which are
perhaps best noted here. They are: I. from the simple root, kṛṣe, hiṣe
(and ohiṣeP), stuṣé; 2. from present-stems, arcase, ṛñjase, yajase,
gāyiṣe, gṛṇīṣé and punīṣé. They have the value of indicative present.
Compare below, 897 b.
895. Optative forms of this aorist are made in the middle only, and
they have in 2d and 3d sing, always the precative s before the endings.
Those found to occur in the older language are: diṣīya, dhiṣīya, bhak¬
ṣīyá, masīya (for maṃsīya), mukṣīya, rāsīya, lopsīya, sākṣīya,
stṛṣīya; maṃsīṣṭhās; darsīsṭa, bhakṣīṣṭa, maṃsīṣṭa, mṛkṣīṣṭa;
bhakṣīmahi, dhukṣīmáhi, maṃsīmáhi, vaṃsīmáhi, vasīmohi,
sakṣīmáhi; maṃsīrata. PB. has bhukṣiṣīya, which should belong to
a siṣ-aorist. The RV. form trā́sīthām (for trāsīyāthām or trāsāthām)
is an isolated anomaly.
a. This optative makes a part of the accepted "precative" of the
later language: see below, 923, 925b.
896—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 320
896. Imperative persons from this aorist are extremely rare: we find
the 2d sing. act. neṣa and parsa and the 2d pl. yaṁsata (from a-stems,
and showing rather, therefore, a treatment of the aorist-stem as a root),
and the 3d sing. mid. rāsatām and pl. rāsantām (of which the same
may be said).
Participles of the s-aorist.
897. a. Active participles are dákṣat or dhákṣat, and sákṣat
(both RV.).
b. If ṛñjase (above, 894 d) is to be reckoned as an s-aorist form,
ṛñjasāná is an s-aorist participle; and of a kindred character, apparently,
are arśasānà, óhasāna, jrayasāná, dhiyasāná, mandasāná, yama¬
sānà, rabhasāná, vṛdhasāná, sahasāná, śavasāná, all in RV.; with
namasāná, bhiyásāna, in AV. In RV. occurs also once dhī́ṣamāṇa,
apparently an a-form of an s-aorist of √dhī.
5. The iṣ-aorist.
898. The tense-stem of this aorist adds the general
tense-sign H s by help of a prefixed auxiliary vowel ^ i ,
making ^\iṣ , to the root, which is usually strengthened,
and which has the augment.
899. The rules as to the strengthening of the root are
as follows:
a. A final vowel has vṛddhi in the active, and guṇa in
the middle: thus, ETTTf-T" apāviṣ and ERfs[~ apaviṣ from
√īījpū cleanse; ^rllí^^atāriṣ, act., from √cT tṛ pass; ^īf-T-
^
aśayiṣ, mid., from √5ÍÌ śī lie.
b. A medial vowel has guṇa, if capable of it, in both
voices: thus, -ydí^l"-f^aleśiṣ, act. and mid., from √fêT2Miś
tear; -M{lfô-^arociṣ from √^r-f^ruc shine; 3^fsf-
^avarṣiṣ
from √~T vṛ§ rain; but -B^fH%~" ajīviṣ from √xfter jīv live.
c. Medial ^ a is sometimes lengthened in the active;
but it more usually remains unchanged in both voices.
d. The roots in the older language which show the lengthening are
kan, tan, ran, stan, svan, han, vraj, sad, mad, car, tsar, svar,
jval, das, tras. From ran, san, kram, vad, rakṣ, and sah occur forms
of both kinds. From √math or manth are made the two stems mathiṣ
and manthiṣ.
321 SIBILAN T AORIST : 5. ÌŚ-AORIST. [—903
900. a. Of exceptions may be noted: √mṛj has (as elsewhere:
627) vṛddhi instead of guṇa: thus, amarjiṣam; √stṛ has astarīs,
and √śṛ has aśarīt (also aśarāit in AV.), with guṇa in active.
b. The root grabh or grah has (as in future etc, below, 936e,
956) long ī instead of i before the sibilant: thus, agrabhīṣma,. agra¬
hīṣṭa, agrabhīṣata. The roots in changeable ṛ (so-called roots in ṛ:
242), and √vṛ are said by the grammarians to do the same optionally;
but no forms with long ī from such roots have been found quotable. A
Sūtra (PGS.) has once anayīṣṭa from √nī (doubtless a false reading).
901. The endings are as in the preceding formation
(3H^us and 5fcT ata in 3d pl.). But in 2d and 3d sing.,
the combinations is-s and iṣ-t are from the earliest period
of the language contracted into Í"MLS and ^īt .
a. The 2d pl. mid. should end always in iḍhvam (or iḍḍhvam,
from iṣ-dhvam: 226); and this is in ßtct the form in the only examples quotable, namely ojaniḍhvam, artiḍhvam, āindhiḍhvam, ve¬
piḍhvam; as to the rules of the native grammarians respecting the
matter, see 226 c.
902. As examples of the inflection of the is-aorist may
be taken the roots Q pū cleanse, and budh wake. Thus:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
1 ^f%- q mfcm m\t^ mUīk MMEIMÌ ^ ^M^HÍ ^
ápāviṣam ápāviṣva ápāviṣma ápaviṣi ápaviṣvahi ápaviṣmahi
2 wmfà mifeiw mfzrs ^TWTĪ Ī wfoMra w wfezq
ápāvīs ápāviṣṭam ápāviṣṭa ápaviṣṭhās ápaviṣāthām ápaviḍhvam
ápāvīt ápāviṣṭām ápāviṣus ápaviṣṭa ápaviṣātām ápaviṣata
l ^4ìíu^i-l^ 3^rfà~ 5RtfÙ"T ^TÌ^f-T ^ÍÌÍM^K C ^-īīf^^īīf%
ábodhiṣam ábodhiṣva ábodhiṣma ábodhiṣi ábodhiṣvahi ábodhiṣmahi
etc. etc. etc etc. etc. etc.
903. The number of roots from which forms of this aorist have
been noted in the older language is nearly a hundred and fifty (in
RV., about eighty; in AV., more than thirty, of which a dozen are
additional to those in RV.); the later texts add less than twenty.
Among these are no roots in ā; but otherwise they are of every variety of form (rarest in finali and ī). Active and middle persons are
freely made, but sparingly from the same root; only about fifteen
903-] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 322
roots have both active and middle forms in the older language, and
of these a part only exceptionally in the one voice or the other.
a. No rule appears to govern the choice of usage between the
iṣ– and the s-aorist; and in no small number of cases the same root
shows forms of both classes.
904. Irregularities are to be noticed as follows :
a. The contracted forms akramīm, ograbhīm, and avadhīm (with
augmentless vádhīm) are found in 1st sing. act.
b. For áśarīt occurs in AV. áśarāit; also (in a part of the manuscripts)
śarāis for śarīs; agrahāiṣam is found in AB. (also the monstrous form
ajograbhāiṣam: see 801 i), Ajayit, with short i in the ending, occurs
in TS.
c. AV. has once nudiṣṭhās, without guṇa.
d. The forms atārima (RV.), avādiran (AV.), and bādhithās
(TA.), though they lack the sibilant, are perhaps to be referred to this
aorist: compare avitá, 908. A few similar cases occur in the epics, and
are of like doubtful character: thus, jānithās, mādithās, vartithās,
śoṅkithās, and (the causative: 1048) aghātayithās, Agṛhītām and
gṛhīthās and gṛhīta, if not false readings for gṛhṇī-, are probably
irregular present-formations.
Modes of the iṣ-aorist.
905. As usual, augmentless indicative forms of this aorist are more
common than proper subjunctives. Examples, of all the persons found to
occur (and including all the accented words), are, in the active: śáṃsiṣam,
vádhīm; máthīs, vádhīs, yā́vīs, sā́vīs; ávīt, jū́rvīt, máthīt, vádh¬
īt, veśīt; mardhiṣṭam, doṣiṣṭam, hiṃsiṣṭam; aviṣṭām, jániṣṭām,
bādhiṣṭām; śramiṣma, vādiṣma; vadhiṣṭa and vadhiṣṭana, math¬
iṣṭana, hiṃsiṣṭa; hvāriṣus, grahīṣus; — in the middle: rādhiṣi;
jániṣṭhās, marṣiṣṭhās, vyathiṣṭhās; krámiṣṭa, jániṣṭa, paviṣṭa,
práthiṣṭa, mándiṣṭa; vyathiṣmahi. The accent is on the root-syllable (tāriṣús, AV. once, is doubtless an error).
906. a. Of subjunctive forms with primary endings occur only the
1st sing. act. daviṣāṇi, and the 1st pl. mid. (with unstrengthened e)
yāciṣāmahe and saniṣāmahe.
b. Forms with secondary endings are almost limited to 2d and 3d
sing. act. There are found: aviṣas, kā́niṣas, tāriṣas, rokṣiṣas, vádh¬
iṣas, vā́diṣas, véṣiṣas, śaṃsiṣas; kā́riṣat, jambhiṣat, jóṣiṣat,
tokṣiṣat, tāriṣat, níndiṣat, parisat, bódhiṣat, márdhiṣat, yāciṣat,
yodhiṣat, rakṣiṣat, vaniṣat, vy athisat, śaṃsiṣat,saniṣat, sāviṣat.
They are made, it will be noticed, with entire regularity, by adding a to the
tense-stem in is before the endings. The only other persons found to occur
are the 3d pl. act. saniṣan and mid. sániṣanta (and TS. has vaniṣanta,
323 SIBILAN T AORIST : 5. iṣ-AORiST. [—911
for the problematic vanuṣanta of RV.), which are also regular. Bhaviṣāt
(AB. once) is a solitary example of a form with double mode-sign; cániṣ¬
ṭhat (RV.; SV. instead jániṣṭhat) seems hopelessly corrupt. The radical
syllable always has the accent, and its vowel usually accords with that of
the indicative: but we have son- in the subjunctive against asāniṣam
(as to cay- and ran-, see below, 908).
907. The middle optative of this aorist also forms a pari of the accepted "precative" of the later language (923, 925 b). It is very rare at
all periods, being made in RV. from only five roots, and in AV. from two
of the same and from three additional ones (six of the eight have other
iṣ-forms); and the remaining texts add, so far as noticed, only four other
roots. All the forms found to occur are as follows: janiṣīya, indhiṣīya,
edhiṣīyá, ruciṣīya and rociṣīya, gmiṣīya; modiṣīṣṭhās; janiṣīṣṭa;
vaniṣīṣṭa; sahiṣīvahi; idhiṣīmahi, edhiṣīmáhi, janiṣīmahi, tāriṣī¬
mahi, mandiṣīmahi, vandiṣīmáhi, vardhiṣīmáhi, sahiṣīmahi and
sāhiṣīmáhi. The accent is on the ending, and this would lead us to expect a weak form of root throughout; but the usage in this respect appears
to be various, and the cases are too few to allow of setting up any rule.
The forms janiṣeyam and -ya, from a secondary a-stem, occur in K.
908. Of imperative forms, we have from √av a series: namely,
aviḍḍhí, aviṣṭu, aviṣṭám, avitá (if this, as seems probable, stands
anomalously for aviṣṭá) and aviṣṭána; two of these are of unmistakably
imperative form. Other forms occur only in 2d du. and 2d pl., and are
accordingly such as might also be subjunctives used imperatively (which
is further made probable for two of them by their accentuation on the
root-syllable): they are kramiṣṭam, gamiṣṭam, caniṣṭám, cayiṣṭam
(against acāyiṣam), tā́riṣṭam, yodhiṣṭam, vadhiṣṭam, śnathiṣṭam;
ráṇisṭana (against arāṇisus), śnathiṣṭana.
909. No words having a participial ending after iṣ are found
anywhere to occur.
910. This is the only aorist of which forms are made in the
secondary and denominative conjugations: see below, 1035, 1048,
1068.
6. The siṣ-aorist.
911. According to the grammarians, this aorist is made
from roots in Eiī ā (including fq" mi fix, mi (or mī) damage
and ^ft lī cling, which substitute forms in ā), and from
^5RT nam bow, EFT yam reach, and TTfram be content, and is
used only in the active; the corresponding middle being of
the s-form (878 ff). Its inflection is precisely like that of
the iṣ-aorist; it is unnecessary, then, to give more than
911—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 324
its first persons, which we may form from the roots 7XĪ yā
go and *FMiam bow. Thus:
s, d. p. s. d. p.
i wrfwr wjjfm m\tk\^\ wffm MHÍÍ^H
'S. -X
áyāsiṣam áyāsiṣva áyāsiṣma ánaṁsiṣam ánaṁsiṣva ánaṁsiṣma
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
912. The siṣ-aorist is properly only a sub-form of the iṣ-aorist,
having the tense-sign and endings of the latter added to a form of root
increased by an added s. It is of extreme rarity in the older language,
being made in RV. only from the roots gā sing and yā go, and in AV.
only from hā leave, and doubtless also from pyā /ill up and van win
(see below, 914b); the remaining older texts add jñā know (B,), jyā overpower, dhyā think (ŚB. once: the edition reads -dhā-), and ram be content (SV.: a bad variant for RV. rāsīya); other Brāhmaṇa forms which
might be also of the s-aorist are adrāsīt, avāsīt, and ahvāsīt; and bhuk¬
ṣiṣīya (PB. S.) must be regarded as an anomalous formation from √bhuj,
unless we prefer to admit a secondary root bhukṣ, like bhokṣ from bhaj.
In the later language have been found quotable from other roots only
glāsīs, adhmāsīt, anaṁsīt, apāsīt, mlāsīs, and amnāsiṣus.
a. The participle hā́samāna and causative hāsayanti (RV.) show
that hās had assumed, even at a very early period, the value of a secondary root beside hā for other forms than the aorist.
913. The whole series of older indicative forms (omitting, as doubtful, the 2d and 3d sing.) is as follows: agāsiṣam, ajñāsiṣam, ayās¬
iṣam, adhyāsiṣam; ajyāsiṣṭām, ayāsiṣṭām; ajñāsisma; ajñāsisṭa,
áyāsiṣṭa; agāsiṣus, ayāsiṣus (ākṣiṣus is from √akṣ attain).
a. Forms without augment are these: jñāsiṣam, raṁsiṣam, hāsi¬
ṣam; hāsiṣṭam; hāsiṣṭām; hāsiṣṭa; hāsiṣus, gāsiṣus, jñāsiṣus.
The accent would doubtless be upon the root-syllable.
914. a. Of proper subjunctives are found two, gāsiṣat and yāsi¬
ṣat (both RV.).
b. Optatives are not less rare: namely, yāsisīṣṭhās and pyāsiṣī¬
mahi (for which the AV. manuscripts read pyāśiṣīmahi, altered in the
edition to pyāyiṣ-); and doubtless vaṃśiṣīya (AV., twice) is to be corrected to vaṃsiṣīya, and belongs here. As to bhukṣiṣīya, see above, 912.
c. The accent of yāsiṣṭám (like aviṣṭám, 908) shows it to be a
true imperative form; and yāsīṣṭa (RV., once) is doubtless the same,
with anomalous ī for i.
915. Middle forms of this aorist, it will be noticed, occur from the
optative only; but, considering the great rarity of the whole formation, we
are hardly justified in concluding that in the ancient language the middle
persons in -siṣi, -siṣṭhās, etc., were not allowable, like those in -iṣi,
-iṣṭhās, and the others of the iṣ-aorist.
325 SIBILAN T AORIST : 7. sa-AORiST. [—919
7. The sa-aorist.
916. In the later language, the roots allowed to form
this aorist end in 5-f^ś, ~^ṣ, or ^ h — all of them sounds
which in combination with the tense-sign make ŚUsṣ; and
they have i" i, 3 u, or ‡Jṛ as radical vowel.
a. They are as follows: diś, riś, liś, viś, kliś, kruś, ruś, mṛś,
spṛś; tviṣ, dviṣ, śliṣ, viṣ, kṛṣ; dih, mih, lih , guh, duh, ruh, tṛh,
vṛh , stṛh; from about half of them sa-forms, earlier orlater, are quotable.
Some ofthem may, or with certain meanings must, take aorists of other forms.
And a few are allowed to drop both tense-sign and union-vowel a in certain persons of the middle: that is, they may make instead forms of the
root-aorist.
917. As the tense-stem ends in -ŚJ a, the inflection is
in the main like that of an imperfect of the second general
conjugation. But (according to the grammarians: the forms
unfortunately have not been found quotable) the 1st sing,
mid. ends in ^ i instead of "7 e, and the 2d and 3d du.
mid. in m%\m āthām and EiīcTR atam, as in imperfects of
the other conjugation. Both active and middle inflection
is admitted. The root is throughout unstrengthened.
918. As example of inflection we may take the root
f^S-T diś point Thus:
ádikṣam ádikṣāva ádikṣāma ádikṣi ádikṣāvah i ádikṣāmah i
2 m^Tīī^ M^HH ^ -5rf^TrT MÍ^I ^ ^īī ^ *tìśtm^
ádikṣas ádikṣatam ádikṣata ádikṣathā s ádikṣāthām ádikṣadhvam
ádikṣat ádikṣatām ádikṣan ádikṣata àdikṣātām ádikṣanta
919. In the earlier language, the forms of the sa-aorist are hardly
more than sporadic. They are made in RV. from seven roots; in AV‚,
from two of these and from two others; and the remaining texts add ten
more, making nineteen in all (the later language makes no additions to
this number). As later, all have i or u or ṛ as, root-vowel, and a final
consonant which combines with s to k ṣ; but there are in the list also two
s.
active,
d. s.
middle,
d. P.
919—] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 326
ending in j , namely mṛj and vṛj. All the examples noted are given
below.
a. So far as the middle forms are concerned, this aorist would be
fully explained as a transfer of certain s-aorists to an a-inflection. The
marked difference in the strength of radical vowel in the active, however,
stands in the way of the successful application of such an explanation to
the active forms.
920. a. In the indicative, we find, in the active: avṛkṣam; adruk¬
ṣas, adhukṣas, arukṣas, akrukṣas, aspṛkṣas (and MBh. adds amṛkṣas);
adikṣat, amiksat, alikṣat, avikṣat, ákrukṣat, aghukṣat, aduksat
and ádhukṣat, árukṣat, avṛkṣat, akṛkṣat, ámṛkṣat, áspṛkṣat;
aghukṣatām; arukṣāma, amṛkṣāma, avṛkṣāma; ádhukṣan, apik¬
ṣan (√piṣ), aruksan, aspṛkṣan; — in the middle, only okṛkṣathās
(√kṛṣ), ádhukṣata, and amṛkṣonta (and MBh. adds amṛkṣata?).
b. Forms without augment (no true subjunctives occur) are, in the
active: dṛkṣam, mṛkṣam; dukṣas, rukṣas, mṛkṣas; dvikṣat;
mṛkṣata; dhukṣán and dukṣán; — in the middle, dvikṣata, duk¬
ṣata and dhúkṣata, dhukṣánta.
c. There are no optative forms.
d. Imperative are: in the active, mṛkṣatam; in the middle, dhuk¬
ṣásva.
e. The few accented forms without augment which occur have the
tone on the tense-sign sá, in analogy with the a-aorist (2) and the imperfect of the á-class: a single exception is dhúkṣata, which probably needs
emendation to dhukṣáta.
f. The aspiration of initial d and g, after loss of the aspirated quality of the root-final (155), is seen in forms from the roots duh and guh,
but not from druh (only a single case, AB,); RV., however, has also
aduksat and duksas, dukṣán, duksata.
Precative.
921. As the so-called precative is allowed by the grammarians
to be made in the later language from every root, and in an independent way, without reference to the mode of formation of the
aorist from the same root, it is desirable to put together here a brief
statement of the rules given for it.
922. The precative active is made by adding the active
precative endings (above, 568) directly to the root. But:
a. Of final root-vowels (as before the passive-sign yá: 770), i and
u are lengthened ; ṛ is usually changed to ri, but to īr and ūr in those
roots which elsewhere show ir- and ur- forms (so-called ṛ-roots: 242), and
to ar in ṛ and smṛ; ā is changed to e in the roots dā, dhā, sthā, pā
drink, gā sing, and a few others, in part optionally.
327 PRECATIVE. [—924
b. The root in general assumes its weakest form: a penultimate
nasal is lost, as in badhyāsam from √bandh; the Toots which are abbreviated in the weak persons ofthe perfect (794) have the same abbreviation
here, asin ucyāsam, ijyāsam, vidhyāsam, supyāsam, gṛhyāsam;
√śās forms śiṣyāsam (compare 639, 854 c): and so on.
c. It has been pointed out above (837) that the active precative is
an optative of the root-aorist, with a problematic insertion of a sibilant
between mode-sign and ending.
923. a. The precative middle is made by adding the
middle precative endings (above, 568) to the root increased
by īī s or iṣ— that is, to the tense-stem of an s-aorist
or of an is-aorist (but without augment).
b. The root is strengthened according to the rules that
apply in forming the middle-stem of the s and ofthe i ṣaorists respectively: in general, namely, a final vowel is
gunated in both formations; but a medial vowel, only before
e. As was pointed out above (567) the middle precative is really the
optative of certain aorists, with the insertion of a sibilant between modesign and ending only (so far as authenticated by use) in the 2d and 3d
singular. In the older language, such forms are oftenest made from the
s-aorist (895) and the iṣ-aorist (907); but also from the root-aorist (837 b),
the a-aorist (850 a), the reduplicated aorist (870), and the siṣ-aorist
(914b); and even from the perfect (812 b).
924. As example of inflection, we may take the root
HJbhū be, which is said (no middle aorist or precative from
it is quotable) to form its middle on the iṣ-stem. Thus:
1 Hīīīī-R W I ~ HOTFT
ex *\ c\ ex
bhūyā́sam bhūyā́sva bhūyā́sma
2
īīīīTH Htntti H 1FcT
G\ "X sx «X ex
bhūyā́s bhūyā́stam bhūyā́sta
cx *X cx -X erx O *X
bhūyā́t bhūyā́stām bhūyā́sus
active.
s. d. p.
924-] XI. AORIST-SYSTEMS. 328
middle.
s. d. p.
bhavifīyá bhavisīváhi bhaviśīmáhi
-x r -s a -s.
bhaviṣīṣṭhā́s bhaviṣīyā́sthām bhaviṣīḍhvám
3
^mt"g HPIMÌUIWIH^ nfa-fl^
bhaviṣīṣṭá bhaviṣīyā́stām bhaviṣīrán
a. The forms given by the grammarians as 2d and 3d dual are of
very questionable value, as regards the place assigned to the sibilant.
Those persons, and the 2d pl., have never been met with in use. Forthe
question respecting the ending of the 2d pl., as dhvam or ḍhvam, see
226 c.
925. a. The precative active is a form of very rare occurrence in
the classical language. In each of the texts already more than once referred
to (Manu, Nala, Bhagavad-Gītā, Śakuntalā, Hitopadeśa) it occurs once
and no more, and not half-a-dozen forms have been found quotable from
the epics. As to its value, see 573 c.
b. The precative middle is virtually unknown in the whole later
literature, not a single occurrence of it having been brought to light. The
BhP. has once rīriṣīṣṭa, which is also a RV. form, belonging probably to
the reduplicated aorist: see 870.
Uses of the Aorist.
926. The uses of the aorist mode-forms (as has been already
pointed out: 582) appear to accord with those of the mode-forms
of the present-system. The predilection ofthe earlier language, continued sparingly in the later, for the augmentless formsin prohibitive
expression after mā́ was sufficiently stated and illustrated above
(579).
a. The tense-value of the aorist indicative has also been more than
once referred to, and calls only for somewhat more of detail and for illustration here.
927. The aorist of the later language is simply a preterit, equivalent to the imperfect and perfect, and frequently
coordinated with them.
a. Thus, tataḥ sa gardabhaṁ laguḍena tāḍayāmāsa; tenā
'sāu pañcatvam agamat (H.) thereupon he beat the donkey with a stick;
and hereof the latter died; tataḥ sā vidarbhōn agamat punaḥ; tāṁ
tu bandhujanaḥ samapūjayat (MBh.) thereupon she went back to
Vidarbha; and her kindred paid her reverence; prītimān abhūt, uvāca
329 USE S OF T H E AORIST . [—929
cāi 'nam (MBh.) he was filled with affection, and said to him; tam ada¬
hat kāṣṭhāiḥ so 'bhūd divyavapus tadā (R.) he burned him with
wood, and he became then a heavenly form.
928. The aorist of the older language has the value of a proper
"perfect": that is, it signifies something past which is viewed as
completed with reference to the present; and it requires accordingly
to be rendered by our tense made with the auxiliary have. In general, it indicates what has just taken place; and oftenest something
which the speaker has experienced.
a. Examples from the Veda are: párī 'mé gā́m aneṣata páry
ogním ahṛṣata, devéṣv akrata śrávaḥ ká imā́ṃ ā́ dadharṣati
(RV.) these here have led about a cow, they have carried around the fire,
they have done honor to the gods - who shall venture anything against them?
y ám āíchāma mánasā so 'yám ā́ 'gāt (RV.) he whom we (formerly,
impf.) sought with our mind has (now, aor.) come; yéné 'ndro havíṣā
kṛtvy ábhavad dyumny ùttamáḥ, idáṁ tád akri devā asapatnáh
kíl ā 'bhuva m (RV.) that libation by which Jndra, making it, became (impf.)
of highest glory, I have now made, ye gods; I have become free from enemies.
b. Examples from the Brāhmaṇa language are: sā́ hā 'smiñ jyóg
uvāsa... táto ha gandharvā́ḥ sám ūdire: jyóg vā́ iyám urváśī
manuṣyêṣv avātsīt (ŚB.) she lived with him a long time. Then the
Qandharvas said to one another, "this Urvaśī, forsooth, hath dwelt a long
time among mortals"; tasya ha dantāḥ pedire: taṁ ho 'vāca: apat¬
sata vā asya dantāḥ (AB.) his teeth fell out. He said to him"his teeth
truly have fallen out"; índrasya vṛtráṁ jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryàm
pṛthivī́m ánu vy archat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho -bhavan sá
prajā́patim úpā *dhāvad vṛtrám me jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryam
pṛthivī́m ánu vy arat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho 'bhūvann íti (TS.)
of Indra, when he had slain Vritra, the force and might went away into the
earth, and became the herbs and plants; he ran to Prajāpati, saying: "my
force and might, after slaying Vritra, have gone away into the earth, and
have become the herbs and plants"; svayám enam abhyudétya brūyād
vrā́tya kva 'vātsīh (AV., in prose passage) going up to him in person,
let him say: **Vrātya, where hast thou abode"? yád idā́nīṁ dvāúviváda¬
mānāv eyā́tām ohám adarśam ahám aśrāuṣam íti yá evá brūyā́d
ahám adarśam íti tásmā evá śráddadhyāma (ŚB.) if now two should
come disputing with one another, [the one] saying "1 have seen",[the other]
" i have heard", we should believe the one who said " i have seen".
929. a. This distinction of the aorist from the imperfect and perfect
as tenses of narration is very common in the Brāhmaṇalanguage (including the older Upaniṣads and the Sūtras), and is closely observed; violation of it is very rare, and is to be regarded as either due to corruption
of text or indicative of a late origin.
b. In the Vedic hymns, the same distinction is prevalent, but is both
less clear and less strictly maintained; many passages would admit an
929—] XII. FUTURE-SYSTEMS. 330
interpretation implying either sense; and evident aorist-forms are sometimes
used narratively, while imperfect-forms are also occasionally employed in
the aorist sense.
930. The boundary between what hasjust been and what is is an
evanescent one, and is sometimes overstepped, so that an aorist appears
where a present might stand, or was even rather to be expected. Thus:
svāsasthe bhavatam indave na iti somo vāi rāje 'nduḥ somā¬
yāi Vāi 'ne etad rājña āsade 'cīklpat (AB. i. 29.7) "be ye comfortable seatsfor our Indu", he says; Indu is king Soma; by this means he
has made them (instead of makes them) suitable for king Soma to sit upon;
vāruṇī́r ā́po yád adbhír abhiṣiñcáti váruṇam evaí 'nam akar
(MS. iv. 3.10) the waters are Varuna's; in that he bepours him with waters,
he has made him Varuna; pañcábhir vyā́ghārayati pā́ṅkto yajñó
yā́vān evá yajñás tám ā́labdhā́ 'tho yā́vān evá yajñás tásmād
rákṣāṃsy ápahanti(MS. iii. 2. 6) he smearswith five;fivefold isthe offer¬
ing; as great as is the offering, of it he has [thereby] taken hold; then, as
great as is the offering, from it he smites away the demons. This idiom is
met with in all the Brāhmaṇas; but it is especially frequent in the MS.
CHAPTE R XII .
931. T H E verb has two futures, of very different age
and character. The one has for tense-sign a sibilant followed by ET ya, and is an inheritance from the time of IndoEuropean unity. The other is a periphrastic formation, made
by appending an auxiliary verb to a derivative noun of
agency, and it is a recent addition to the verb-system; its
beginnings only are met with in the earliest language. The
former may be called the s-future (or the old future, or
simply the future); the latter may be distinguished as the
periphrastic future.
THE FUTURE-SYSTEMS.
331 T H E S-FUTURE . [—934
I. The s-future.
932. The tense-sign of this future is the syllable HT
sya', added to the root either directly or by an auxiliary
vowel ^ i (in the latter case becoming "JQ" iṣyá). The root
has the guṇa-strengthening. Thus, from √3J da give is
formed the future tense-stem 3TF" dasyá; from √^ i go, the
stem "SET eṣya; from √~qj duh milk, the stem 5ìrdhokṣyá;
from √^bhú be, the stem HÍ^TO bhaviṣya; from >~^ṛdh
thrive, the stem śrfsfej ardhiṣyá; and so on.
a. But from √jīv live the stem is jīviṣyá, from √ukṣ sprinkle it
is ukṣiṣyá, and so on (240).
b. There are hardly any Vedic cases of resolution of the tense-sign
sya into sia; RV. has kṣeṣiántas once.
933. This tense-stem is then inflected precisely like a
present-stem ending in ST a (second general conjugation:
733 a). We may take as models of inflection the future of
√~í dā give, and that of √~ kṛ make. Thus:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
l 3THrrfīī 5THJT"^ ^ituiHH^ ^TFīī <lUIM<fc 3JTīīīīT%i
dāsyā́mi dāsyā́vas dāsyā́mas dāsyé dāsyā́vahe dāsyā́mahe
dāsyási dāsyáthas dāsyátha dāsyáse dāsyéthe dāsyádhve
3 ŚH-lrfcT cyHlrl ^ 37HTfä 3JHT^ 5J^H ~Hī%
dāsyáti dāsyátas dāsyánti dāsyáte dāsyéte dāsyánte
kariṣyā́mi kariṣyā́vas kariṣyā́mas kariṣyé kariṣyā́vahe kariṣyā́mahe
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
a. In the epics are found occasional cases of 1st du. and pl. in va
and ma: e. g. raṁsyāva (R.), bhakṣayiṣyāva (causative: MBh.);
eṣyāma (MBh.), vatsyāma (R.).
934. With regard to the use or non-use of the auxiliary vowel
i before the sibilant, there is a degree of general accordance between
this tense and the other future and the desiderative; but it is by no
means absolute, nor are any definite rules to be laid down with regard to it (and so much the less, because of the infrequency of the
two latter formations in actual use): between this and the aorist (s-
934—] XII. FUTURE-SYSTEMS. 332
aorist on the one side, or iṣ-aorist on the other), any correspondence
is still less traceable. Practically, it is necessary to learn, as a matter of usage, how any given root makes these various parts of its
conjugational system.
935. Below is added a statement of the usage, as regards the auxiliary vowel, of all the roots found quotable — for the most part, in the
form of a specification of those which add the tense-sign directly to the
root; in brackets are further mentioned the other roots which according to
the grammarians also refuse the auxiliary vowel.
a. Of roots ending in vowels, the great majority (excepting those in
ṛ) take no i. Thus, all in a (numerous, and unnecessary to specify: but
compare c below); — those in i , as kṣi possess, ci gather, ci note, mi, si
or sā bind (siṣya), hi; from i, kṣi destroy, and ji occur forms of both classes; śri [and śvi] has i ; — those in ī, as krī, bhī, mī, vlī; but śī
lie and nī have both forms [and ḍī takes i]; — those in u, as cyu, dru,
plu, śru, hu; but su press out and stu have both forms [and kṣu,
kṣṇu, nu, yu, ru, snu take i]; — of those in ū, dhū and bhū take
i ; sū has both forms. But all in ṛ (numerous, and unnecessary to specify)
take i [those in changeable ṛ, |or so-called f-roots (242), are said by the
grammarians to take either i or I; no ī-forms, however, are quotable].
b. Of roots ending in mutes, about half add the tense-sign directly.
Thus, of roots ending in gutturals, śak; — in palatals: in c, pac, mue,
ric, vac, vie, vraśc, sic (but yāc takes i); in ch, prach; in j , bhañj,
mṛj (mārkṣya and mrakṣya), yaj, bhuj, yuj, vṛj, sṛj [also bhrajj,
rañj, sañj, svañj, nij, ruj], while tyaj, bhaj, and majj (maṅkṣya and
majjiṣya) have both forms, and vij (vijiṣya and vejiṣya) and vraj
take i ; — in dentals : in t, kṛt cut and vṛt [also cṛt and nṛt] make
both forms; in d, ad, pad, śad fall, skand, syand, chid, bhid, vid
find, nud [also had, khid, svid, kṣud, tud]; while sad (satsya and
sīdiṣya) and vid know make both forms [also chṛd and tṛd], and vad
has i ; in dh, vyadh (vetsya), rādh, sidh succeed, budh, yudh, rudh,
vṛdh [also sādh, krudh, kṣudh, śudh], and bandh and sidh repel
have both forms; in n, tan, while man and han have both forms; — in
labials: in p, āp, kṣip, gup, tṛp, sṛp (srapsya and sarpsya) [also
cap, lip, lup], while tap, vap, svap, dṛp, and kip have both forms;
in bh, yabh and rabh, labh having both forms; in m, ram, while kram,
kṣam, nam, and yam make both forms.
c. Of the roots reckoned by the grammarians as ending in semivowels
(761 d—g) all take i . And v ā or v i weave, vy ā or v ī envelop, and h v ā
or h ū call take a y-form, as in their present-system, to which then i is added :
thus, vayiṣya , vyayiṣya, hvayiṣya (but also hvāsya).
d. Of roots ending in spirants, the minority (about a third) are without the auxiliary vowel. They are: roots in ś, diś, viś, dṛś (drokṣya),
spṛś (sprokṣya) [also daṃś, riś, liś, kruś, mṛś], while naś be lost
has both forms (naṅkṣya and naśiṣya); — in ṣ, piṣ, viṣ, śiṣ [also
333 T H E S-FUTURE. [—938
tviṣ, dviṣ, śliṣ, tuṣ, duṣ, puṣ, śuṣ], while kṛṣ has both forms (krak¬
ṣya and karṣiṣya); — in s‚ vas shine, vas clothe [also ghas], while
vas dwell has both forms; — in h, mih, duh, druh [also nah, dih,
lih], while dah, vah, sah, and ruh have both forms.
e. In the older language, a majority (aboutfiveninths) of simple roots
add the sya without auxiliary i ; of the futures occurring in the later
language only, nearly three quarters have the i, this being generally taken
by any root of late origin and derivative character — as it is also uniformly taken in secondary conjugation (1019, 1036, 1050, 1068).
936. As the root is strengthened to form the stem of this future, so,
of a root that has a stronger and a weaker form, the stronger form is used:
thus, from √bandh or badh bind, bhantsya or bandhiṣya.
a. By an irregular strengthening, naṅkṣya (beside naśiṣya) is made
from √naś be lost, and maṅkṣya (beside majjiṣya) from √majj sink.
b. But a few roots make future-stems in the later language without
strengthening: thus, likhiṣya, miliṣya (also TS.), vijiṣya (also vejiṣya),
siṣya (√sā or si), sūṣya (939 b), sphuṭiṣya; and √vyadh makes
vetsya from the weaker form vidh.
c. The ŚB. has once the monstrous form aśnuviṣyāmohe, made
upon the present-stem aśnu (697) of √aś attain. And the later language
makes sīdiṣya and jahiṣya from the present-stems of √sad and √hā.
Compare further hvayiṣya etc, 935 c Also khyāyiṣya from √khyā
(beside khyasya) appears to be of similar character.
d. A number of roots with medial ṛ strengthen it to ra (241): thus,
krakṣya, trapsya, drapsya, drakṣya, mrakṣya (beside mārkṣya),
sprakṣya, srakṣya, srapsya (beside sarpsya), and mradiṣya (beside
mardiṣya); and √klp forms klapsya (beside kalpiṣya),
e. The root grah (also its doublet glah) takes ī instead of i , as it
does also in the aorist and elsewhere.
937. This future is comparatively rare in the oldest language — in
part, apparently, because the uses of a future are to a large extent answered by subjunctive forms — but becomes more and more common later.
Thus, the RV. has only seventeen occurrences of personal forms, from nine
different roots (with participles from six additional roots); the AV. has
fifty occurrences, from twenty-five roots (with jparticiples from seven more);
but the TS. has occurrences (personal forms and participles together) from
over sixty roots; and forms from more than a hundred and fifty roots are
quotable from the older texts.
Modes of the s-future.
938. Mode-forms of the future are of the utmost rarity. The only
example in the older language is kariṣyā́s, 2d sing. subj. act., occurring
once (or twice) in RV. (AB. has once notsyāvahāi, and GB. has eṣyā¬
mahāi, taṃsyāmahāi, sthāsyāmahāi, but they are doubtless false read-
938—] XII. FUTURE-SYSTEMS. 334
ings for -he. Two or three optative forms are found in the epics: thus,
dhakṣyet and maṃsyeran (MBh.), and drakṣyeta (R.); also an imperative patsyontu (Har.). And several 2d pl. mid. in dhvam are quotable
from the epics: thus, vetsyadhvam, saviṣyadhvam, and (the causative)
kālayiṣyadhvam (PB.) and jīvayiṣyadhvam (MBh.: and one text has
mokṣyadhvam at i. 133.13, where the other reads mokṣayadhvam),
and bhaviṣyadhvam (MBh. R.): it is a matter of question whether these
are to be accounted a real imperative formation, or an epic substitution
of secondary for primary endings (compare 542 a).
Participles of the s-future.
939. Participles are made from the future-stem precisely as from a present-stem in a: namely, by adding
in the active the ending rT^nt, in the middle the ending ī-TR
māna; the accent remains upon the stem. Thus, from the
verbs instanced above, ^THJtT^dāsyant and "ÍT2FTR dāsya¬
māna, <^í(c.q-^kariṣyánt and -^Í(^HIUI kariṣyamāṇa.
a. According to the grammarians, the feminine of the active participle
is made either in ántī or in atī́; but only the former has been noted as
occurring in the older language, and the latter is everywhere extremely
rare: see above, 449e‚f.
b. In RV. occurs once sū́ṣyantī, from √sū, with anomalous accentuation.
Preterit of the s-future: Conditional.
940. From the future-stem is made an augment-preterit,
by prefixing the augment and adding the secondary endings,
in precisely the same manner as an imperfect from a present-stem in a. This preterit is called the conditional.
a. It standsrelated to the future, in form and meaning, as the French
conditional aurais to the future aurai, or as the English would have to
will have — nearly as the German würde haben to werde haben.
b. Thus, from the roots already instanced:
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i -M<IUI^ ZftWim ^HJTī ī 4<IUII°IÌ^ M<imwfe
ádāsyam ádāsyāv a ádāsyāma ádāsye ádāsyāvah i ádāsyāmah i
335 T H E CONDITIONAL . [—943
2 *|<|HI«^ ^HTrP ^ M<IRIH -5KIHIfall ^ ^THTiJ \
ádāsyas ádāsyatam ádāsyata ádāsyathās ádāsyethām ádāsyadhvam
3 *l<IHIf^*l<IHIHI ^ srśjHTcT *4<IWĪrtlH^ *H!Wt l
ádāsyat ádāsyatām ádāsyan ádāsyata ádāsyetām ádāsyanta
i ^f^r c -y-híj^N ^Í^ I H *i+R-5l y^r^uNÍ^ ***Í^IHÍ-fc
ákariṣyam ákariṣyāva ákariṣyāma ákariṣye ákariṣyāvahi ákariṣyāmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
941. The conditional is the rarest of all the forms of the Sanskrit
verb. The RV. has but a single example, ábhariṣyat was going to carry
off, and none of the Vedic texts furnishes another. In the Brāhmaṇas it
is hardly more common — except in ÇB., where it is met with more than
fifty times. Nor does it, like the future, become more frequent later: not
an example occurs in Nala, Bhagavad-Gïtā, or Hitopadeśa; only one in
Manu; and two in Çakuntalā. In the whole MBh. (Holtzmann) it is found
about twenty-five times, from thirteen roots. The middle forms are extremely few.
II. The Periphrastic Future.
942. a. This formation contains only a single indicative active tense (or also middle: see 947), without modes,
or participle, or preterit.
b. It consists in a derivative nomen agentis, having the
value of a future active participle, and used, either with
or without an accompanying auxiliary, in the office of a
verbal tense with future meaning.
943. The noun is formed by the suffix cT tṛ (or <~~
tar); and this (as in its other than verbal uses: see 1182)
is added to the root either directly or with a preceding
auxiliary vowel ^ i , the root itself being strengthened by
guṇa, but the accent resting on the suffix: thus, 3JcT dātṛ́
from √3J da give; -~~ kartṛ from √~ kṛ make; *TfàrT
bhavitṛ́ from √H bhū be.
a. As regards the presence or absence of the vowel i, the usage is
said by the grammarians to be generally the same as in the s-future from
the same root (above, 935). The most important exception is that the
roots in ṛ take no i : thus, kartṛ (against kariṣya); roots han and gam
show the same difference; while vṛt, vṛdh, and syand have i here, though
943—] XII. FUTURE-SYSTEMS. 336
not in the s-future. The few forms which occur in the older language
agree with these statements.
944. In the third persons, the nom. masc. of the noun,
in the three numbers respectively (373), is used without
auxiHary: thus, HfelHI bhavitā́ he or she or it will be;
HÍc|Hl[ì bhavitārau both will be; HÍMHI bhavitāras they
will be. In the other persons, the first and second persons
present of √-TO as be (636) are used as auxiliary; and they
are combined, in all numbers, with the singular nom. masc.
of the noun.
a. Thus, from y~J dā give:
s. d. p.
1 <IHIÌH 4IHIH ^ <IHIH ^
dātasmi dātā́svas dātā́smas
2 Relli n ~ícīī~J~^ «^irlN
dātā́si dātā́sthas dātā́stha
3
~I~T "TTTT1
dātā́ dātā́rāu dātā́ras
active.
b. Occasionally, in the epics and later (almost never in the older
language), the norm of the tense as given above is in various respects departed from: thus, by use of the auxiliary in the 3d person also; by its
omission in the 1st or 2d person; by inversion of the order of noun and
auxiliary; by interposition of other words between them; by use of a dual
or plural nom. with the auxiliary; and by use of a feminine form of the
noun. Examples are: vakt ā 'sti (MBh.) he will speak; nihant ā (MBh.)
I shall or thou wilt strike down, yoddhā 'ham (R.) I shall fight, ahaṁ draṣ¬
ṭā (MBh.) I shall see, kartā 'haṁ te (BhP.) I will do for thee, tvam
bhavit ā (MBh. Megh.) thou wilt be,- asmi ganta (MBh.) I shall go;
pratigrahīt ā t ā m asmi (MBh.) I will receive her, hanta tvam asi
(MBh.) thou wilt slay; kartārā u svaḥ (MBh.) we two shall do; draṣṭry
asmi (MBh.) I (f.)i shall see, udbhavitrī (NEis.) she will increase,
gantrī (Y.) she will go. AB. has once sot ā as 2d sing., thou wilt
press; JUB. makes the combination śmaśānān i bhavitāra s the cemeteries
will be.
c. An optative of the auxiliary appears to be once used, in yoddh ā
syām I would fight (R. i. 22. 25 Peterson; but the Bombay edition reads
yoddhuṁ yāsyāmi).
945. The accent in these combinations, as in all the ordinary
cases of collocation of a verb with a preceding predicate noun or
337 PERIPHRASTIC FUTURE. [—948
adjective (592), is on the noun itself; and, unlike all the true verbal
forms, the combination retains its accent everywhere even in an independent clause: thus, tárhi vā́ atināṣṭró bhavitā́smi (ŚB.) then I
shall be out of danger (where bhaviṣyāmi, if used, would be accent¬
less). Whether in a dependent clause the auxiliary verb would take
an accent (595), and whether, if so, at the expense of the accent of
the noun (as in the case of a preposition compounded with a verbform: 1083 b), we are without the means of determining.
946. In the Veda, the nomina agentis in tṛ or tar, like various other
derivative nouns (271), but with especial frequency, are used in participial
construction, governing the accusative if they come from roots whose verbal
forms do so (1182). Often, also, they are used predicatively, with or without
accompanying copula; yet without any implication of time; they are not the
beginnings, but only the forerunners, of a new tense-formation. Generally,
when they have a participial value, the root-syllable (or a prefix preceding
it) has the accent. The tense-use begins, but rather sparingly, in the
Brāhmaṇas (from which about thirty forms are quotable); and it grows more
common later, though the periphrastic future is nowhere nearly so frequent
as the s-future (it is quotable later from about thirty additional roots).
947. a. A few isolated attempts are made in the Brāhmaṇas to form
by analogy middle persons to this future, with endings corresponding after
the usual fashion to those of the active persons. Thus, TS. has once pra¬
yoktā́se 1 will apply (standing related to prayoktāsmi as, for example,
śāse to śāsmi); ŚB. has śayitā́se thou shalt lie (similarly related to
śayitāsi); and TB. has yaṣṭā́smahe we will make offering. But in TA.
is found (i. 11) yaṣṭā́he as 1st sing., showing a phonetic correspondence of
a problematic character, not elsewhere met with in the language.
b. On the basis of such tentative formations as these, the native
grammarians set up a complete middle inflection for the periphrastic future,
as follows:
s. d. p.
1 dātā́he dātā́svahe dātā́smahe
2 dātā́se dātā́sāthe dātā́dhve
3 dātā́ dātā́rāu dātā́ras
c. Only a single example of such a middle has been brought to light
in the later language, namely (the causative) darśayitāhe (Nāi§.),
Uses of the Futures and Conditional.
948. As the s-future is the commoner, so also it is the one
more indefinitely used. It expresses in general what is going to take
place at some time to come— but often, as in other languages, adding on the one hand an implication of will or intention, or on the
other hand that of promise or threatening.
948—] XII. FUTURE-SYSTEMS. 338
a. A few examples are: varṣiṣyáty āiṣámah parjányo vṛ́ṣṭimān
bhaviṣyati (ŚB.) it is going to rain; Parjanya is going to be rich in rain
this year; yás tán ná véda kím ṛcā́ kariṣyati (RV.) whoever does not
know that, what will he do with verse?ā́vāí vayám agní dhāsyāmahé
'tha yūyáṁ kíṁ kariṣyatha (ŚB.) we are going to build the two fires;
then what will you do? tám índro -bhyā́dudrāva haniṣyán (ŚB.) him
7ndra ran at, intending to slay; yády evā́ kariṣyátha sākáṁ devāír
yajñíyāso bhaviṣyatha (RV.) if ye will do thus, ye shall be worthy of
the sacrifice along with the gods; dántās te śatsyanti (AV.) thy teeth will
fall out; ná mariṣyasi mā́ bibheḥ (AV.) thou shall not die; be not
afraid; brūhi kva yāsyasi (MBh.) tell us; where are you going to go?
yadi mām pratyakhyāsyasi viṣam āsthāsye (MBh.) if you shall reject
me,I will resort to poison. Asin other languages, the tense is also sometimes used for the expression of a conjecture or presumption: thus: ko
'yaṁ devo gandharvo vā bhaviṣyati (MBh.) who is this ? he is doubtless
a god, or a Oandharva; adya svapsyanti (MBh.) they must be sleeping now.
b. The spheres of future and desiderative border upon one another, and the one is sometimes met with where the other might be expected. Examples of the future taken in a quasi-desiderative sense are
as follows: yád dāśúṣe bhadráṁ kariṣyási távé 't tat satyám (RV.)
what favor thou wiliest to bestow on thy worshiper, that of thee becometh
actual (is surely brought about); yáthā 'nyád vadiṣyánt so 'nyád vádet
(ŚB.) as if, intending to say one thing, one were to say another.
949. The periphrastic future is defined by the grammarians as
expressing something to be done at a definite time to come. And
this, though but faintly traceable in later use, is a distinct characteristic of the formation in the language where it first makes its appearance. It is especially often used along with śvás tomorrow.
a. A few examples are: adyá varṣiṣyati ... śvó vraṣṭā́ (MS.) it is
going to rain today; it will rain tomorrow; yatarān va ime śvah kami¬
tāras te jetāras (K.) whichever of the two parties these shall choose tomorrow,
they will conquer; prātár yaṣṭā́smahe (TB.) we shall sacrifice tomorrow
morning; ityahé vaḥ paktasmi (ŚB.) on such and such a day I will
cook for you; tán ma ékaṁ rā́trim ante śayitā́se jātá u te 'yáṁ
tárhi putró bhavitā́ (ŚB.) then you shall lie with me one night, and at
that time this son of yours will be born. In other cases, this deflniteness
of time is wanting, but an emphasis, as of special certainty, seems perhaps
to belong to the form: thus, bibhṛhí mā pārayiṣyā́mi tvé 'ti: kásmān
mā pārayiṣyasī́ 'ty āughá imā́ḥ sárvāḥ prajā́ nirvoḍhā́, tátas tvā
pārayitā̀smī́ 'ti (ŚB.) support me and I will save you, said it. From
what will you save me? said he. A flood is going to carry off all these
creatures; from that I will save you, said it; paridevayāṁ cakrire
mahac chokabhayam prāptāsmaḥ (GB.) they set up a lamentation:
"we are going to meet with great pain and dread"; yaje 'yakṣi yaṣṭāhe ca
(TA.) I sacrifice, I have sacrificed, and I shall sacrifice. In yet other cases.
339 USES OF T H E FUTURE S A N D CONDITIONAL. [—950
in the older language even, and yet more in the later, this future appears
to be equivalent to the other: thus, prajāyām enaṁ vijñātāsmo yadi
vidvān vā juhoty avidvān vā (AB.) in his children we shall know him,
whether he is one that sacrifices with knowledge or without knowledge; vak¬
tāsmo vā idaṁ devebhyah (AB.) we shall tell this to the gods; yadi
svārtho mamā 'pi bhavitā tata evaṁ svārthaṁ kariṣyāmi (MBh.)
if later my own affair shall come up, then I will attend to my own affair;
kathaṁ tu bhavitāsy eka iti tvāṁ nṛpa śocimi (MBh.) but how will
you get along alone ?that, 0 king, is the cause of my grief about you.
950. The conditional would seem to be most originally and
properly used to signify that something was going to be done. And
this value it has in its only Vedic occurrence, and occasionally elsewhere. But usually it has the sense ordinarily called "conditional";
and in the great majority of its occurrences it is found (like the subjunctive and the optative, when used with the same value) in both
clauses of a conditional sentence.
a. Thus, yó vṛtrā́ya sínam átrā́ 'bhariṣyat prá táṁ jánitrī
vidúṣa uvāca (RV.) him, who was going here to carry off Vritra's wealth,
his mother proclaimed to the knowing one; śatāyuṁ gām akariṣyam
(AB.) I was going to make (should have made) the cow live a hundred years
(in other versions of the same story is added the other clause, in which the
conditional has a value more removed from its original: thus, in GB,, if
you, villain, had not stopped [prā́grahīṣyaḥ] my mouth); táta eva 'sya
bhayáṁ vī 'yāya kásmād dhy ábheṣyad dvitī́yād vāí bhayám
bhavati (ŚB.) thereupon his fear departed; for of whom was he to be afraid?
occasion of fear arises from a second person; útpapāta ciráṁ tán mene
yád vā́saḥ paryádhāsyata (ŚB.) he leaped up; he thought it long that
he should put on a garment; sà tád evá nā́ 'vindat prajā́patir yátrā́
'hoṣyat (MS.) Prajāpati, verily, did not thenfindwhere he was to (should)
sacrifice; evaṁ cen nā 'vakṣyo mūrdhā te vyapatiṣyat (0B.) if you
should not speak thus, your head would fly off; sá yád dhāi 'tā́vad evā́
'bhaviṣyad yā́vatyo hāi 'vā́ 'gre prajā́ḥ sṛṣṭā́s tā́vatyo hāi 'va
'bhaviṣyan ná prā ̀ 'jiṣyanta (ŚB.) if he had been only so much, there
would have been only so many living creatures as were created atfirst;they
would have had no progeny; kiṁ vā 'bhaviṣyad aruṇas tamasāṁ
vibhettā taṁ cet sahasrakiraṇo dhuri nā 'kariṣyat (Ś.) would
the Dawn, forsooth, be the scatterer of the darkness, if the thousand-rayed
one did not set her on the front of his chariot?
951—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 340
CHAPTE R XIII .
VERBAL ADJECTIVES AND NOUNS: PARTICIPLES,
INFINITIVES, GERUNDS.
951 a. THOS E verbal adjectives, or participles, which are made
from tense-stems, and so constitute a part of the various tensesystems, have been already treated. It remains to describe certain
others, which, being made directly from the root itself, belong to the
verbal system as a whole, and not to any particular part of it.
b. The infinitive (with a few sporadic exceptions in the older
language) also comes in all cases from the root directly, and not from
any of the derived tense-stems.
c. The same is true of the so-called gerunds, or indeclinable
participles.
Passive Participle in tá or ná.
952. By the accented suffix ?T tá — or, in a comparatively small number of verbs, ^ ná — is formed a verbal
adjective which, when coming from transitive verbs, qualifies anything as having endured the action expressed by
the verb: thus, <~T datta given; 3WT uktá spoken. Hence
it is usually called the passive participle; or, to distinguish
it from the participle belonging to the passive present-system (771), the past passive participle.
a. When made from an intransitive or neuter verb, the
same participle, as in other languages, has no passive but
only an indefinite past sense: thus, JJcT gatá gone; HcT bhūtá
been; qfART patitá fallen.
953. In general, this participle is made by adding
tá to the bare verbal root, with observation of the ordinary
rules of euphonic combination.
a. Some roots, however, require the prefixion of the auxiliary
vowel i to the suffix. For these, and for the verbs that add ná instead of tá, see below, 956, 957.
341 PASSIV E PARTICIPL E IN ta OR na. [—955
b. As to the accent when the root is preceded by a preposition,
see 1085 a.
954. T h e root before FT t á has usually its weakest form,
i f there is anywhere i n the verbal system a distinction of
weak and strong forms. Thus:
a. A penultimate nasal is not seldom dropped: examples are
aktá (√añj), baddhá (√bandh), śrabdha (√śrambh), daṣṭá (√daṃś),
srasta (√sraṃs), bāḍha (√baṃh).
b. Roots which are abbreviated in the weak forms of the perfect (794) suffer the same abbreviation here: examples are uktá
(√vac), uṣṭá (√vas shine), uptá (√vap: also vapta), ūḍhá (√vah),
suptá (√svap), iṣṭá (√yaj), viddhá (√vyadh); — and, by a similar
procedure, √prach (or praś) makes pṛṣṭá, √bhraṃś makes bhṛṣṭa
(beside the regular bhraṣṭá), and √śrā boil makes śṛtá (beside
śrātá).
c. Final ā is weakened to ī in gītá (√gā sing), dhītá (√dhā
suck), pītá (√pā drink), sphīta; and jītá, vītá, śītá are made from
the roots jyā, vyā, śyā, (or jī etc.); — and further to i in chitá (beside
chātá), dita (√dā divide and dā bind), drita (? √drā sleep), hitá (√dhā
put: with h for dh; but dhita also occurs in V.), mitá (√mā measure),
śitá (also śāta), sitá, sthitá.
d. Afinalm is lost after a in gatá, natá, yatá, ratá (from √gam
etc.); and a final n in kṣata, tatá, matá, hatá. As to the other roots
in am and an taking ta, see 955 a, b.
e. More isolated cases are -Uta (RV.: √av), utá or Uta (√vā weave),
śiṣṭá (also śāsta: √śās), mūrtá (referred to √mūrch). As to -gdha
and jagdhá, see 233 f.
f. On the other hand, √svad makes svāttá.
955. Of more irregular character are the following:
a. A number of roots ending in am retain the nasal, and lengthen the radical vowel (as also in some others of their verbal forms):
thus, kāṁta, krāṁtá, klāṁtá, kṣāṁta, cāṁta, tāṁtá, dāṁtá,
bhrāṁta, vāṁtá, śāṁtá (√śam be quiet), śrāṁtá (from √kam etc.);
and one in an, dhvan sound, makes dhvāntá.
b. A few roots in an make their participle from another root-form
in ā: thus, khātá, jātá, -vāta, sātá; dham has both dhamitá and
dhmātá.
c. Certain roots in īv take their yū-form (765 a): thus, dyūtá
(√dīv play), ṣṭhyūta, syūtá; but √mīv makes -mūta.
d. From roots in changeable ṛ (generally taking na: 957b) are
made also pūrtá (√pṛ /ill: beside pṛta), śīrta and śūrtá (√śṛ crush);
and śīrta is further made from √śrī mix.
955—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 342
e. Double forms are mugdhá and mūḍha, sāḍhá and soḍha, dhurta
and dhruta, hvṛta and hrutá.
f. The root da give makes dattá (from the secondary root-form dad;
but data also in V.). But the anomalously contracted form -tta (as if
for data, with the radical vowel lost) is also frequent in composition, especially with prepositions: thus, ā́tta, ánutta, párītta, prátta, prátītta;
rarely with other elements, as devátta, punartta, marútta(?). And the
same abbreviated form comes from √dā divide in ávatta.
g. The roots making participles in both ta and ita, or ta and na, or
in all three, will be noted in the next two paragraphs.
956. The suffix with ^ i, or in the form ^rT itá, is
used especially with roots having finals that are only with
difficulty, if at all, combinable with rT^t according to the
usual analogies of the language, and often with roots of a
secondary, derivative, or late character; but also not seldom
with original roots.
a. Thus, of roots presenting difficulties of combination: — I. all that
end in two consonants (save those of which one consonant is lost by a weakening process: 954 a‚ b): e. g. śank, valg, vāñch, lajj, ubj, ceṣṭ,
ghūrṇ, katth, nind, jalp, cumb, umbh, khall, pinv, śaṃs (also
śastá), rakṣ, hiṃs, garh (in all, over fifty); but takṣ makes taṣṭá; —
2. all that end in linguals (including ṣ after a or ā ): e. g. at, truṭ, paṭh,
luṭh, īḍ, vruḍ, bhaṇ, kaṣ, bhāṣ; — 3. all that end in surd spirants:
e. g. likh, grath, nāth, kuth, riph, guph; — 4. all that end in 1: e. g.
cal, gil, mīl, luI. khel: — 5. all that end in other persistent semivowels : namely, carv (also cūrṇa), jīv (for the other roots in īv, see
955 c), dhāv run, sev, day, vyay, pūy; — 6. ujh. — This class includes
more than half of the whole number that take only ita.
b. Of other roots ending in consonants: — 1. in gutturals, cak,
ḍhāuk (śak has both ta and ita); ślāgh; — 2. in palatals, ac (also
akná), uc, kuc, khac, yāc, ruc; aj?, kūj, vraj, also tyaj and mṛj in
late texts (usually tyaktá and mṛṣṭá); — 3. in dentals, at, pat, ścut,
also yat in epos (elsewhere only yattá); krad, khād, gad, cud, nad,
mud, mṛd, rad, rud, vad, vid know, hrād; also nud in epos (elsewhere
nuttá and nunna); mad has both mattá and maditá (the majority
of roots in d take na: 957 d); edh, kṣudh, gadh, dudh, nādh,
bādh, spardh; an, in, kvan, dhvan, pan, ran ring, van, stan,
svan, and dhvan (also dhvāntá); — 4. in labials, cup, yup, rup,
and usually kup (kupta late) and lap (lapta epic), occasionally kṣip,
gup, tap, dṛp, vap, cap, while jap has both ta and ita; grabh
(gṛbhītá), śubh, skabh, and occasionally lubh, while kṣubh and
stabh have both forms; tim, dham, cam labor, stim, and ksam in
epos (also kṣāṁta); — 5. in spirants, aś eat, īś, kāś, kṛś, vāś, śaś,
343 PASSIVE PRTICIPL E I N ta OR na. [—957
while piś has both forms, and mṛś takes ita only late; iṣ send, īṣ, kuṣ,
tṛṣ, tviṣ, pruṣ, miṣ, rūṣ, heṣ, hreṣ, also muṣ except late, while dhṛṣ,
ruṣ, and hṛṣ show both forms; ās, bhas, bhās, ras, las, vas clothe,
has, also as throw occasionally, while kas, gras, yas, vas shine, vas
dwell, śās (with śiṣṭá and śāsta), śvas, and hras make both forms;
īh, grah (gṛhītá), jah (secondary form of hā), mah, rah, and occasionally
ūh remove, while gāh has both forms.
c. Of roots ending in vowels, only śī lie, which makes śayita (with
guṇa of root, as elsewhere: 629).
d. In general, a root maintains its full form before ita; but there
are a few exceptions: thus, gṛbhītá and gṛhītá (the root being reckoned
as grabh and grah: see 729), uditá (also vadita in the later language),
uṣita (√vas shine; beside uṣṭá), uṣita (√vas dwell: also sporadically
vasita and uṣṭa), ukṣitá (√vakṣ increase),śṛthitá (√śrath). From
√mṛj are made both mṛjita and mārjita (with strengthening as in present and elsewhere: 627), beside mṛṣṭá.
e. Instead of i , long ī is taken in gṛbhītá and gṛhītá.
957. The suffix -7 ná (always without auxiliary ^ i) is
taken instead of cT ta by a number of roots (about seventy).
Thus:
a. Certain roots in ā: thus, kṣā, glā, drā run, drā sleep, (also
drita ?), mlā (also mlātá), vā blow (also vāta), śyā (also śīná), styā,
hā leave (also hīná and hāta), hā go forth; and dā divide makes diná
(also dita and -tta). Further, certain roots in i- and u-vowels: thus, kṣi
destroy (kṣīṇa; also kṣità), ḍī, pī, lī cling, vlī, śī or śyā coagulate
(beside śyāna and śīta), hrī (beside hrīta); dū burn (also duta), lū,
śū; and dīv lament makes dyūna (compare 765),
b. Roots in ṛ, which before the suffix becomes īr or ūr: the forms
are, arṇa (late; beside ṛtá), kīrṇa (√kṛ scatter), gīrṇá (√gṛ swallow),
jīrṇá and jūrṇá (√jṛ waste away), tīrṇá and tūrṇa (also tūrtá), dīrṇá
(√dṛ pierce: also dṛta), pūrṇá (√pṛ fill: also pūrtá and pṛta), mūrṇá
(√mṛ crush), śīrṇá (√śṛ crush: also śīrta and śūrtá?), stīrṇá (also
stṛta). Of like character with these are īrṇá from √īr, cīrṇa (beside
carita) from √car, gūrṇa (beside gūrtá) from √gur, a secondary form
of gṛ, and cūrṇa (beside carvita) from √carv, which is also plainly a
secondary root.
c. A few roots ending in j (which becomes g before the suffix,
against the usual rule of internal combination: 216f): thus, bhagna
(√bhafíj), bhugna (√bhuj bend), magná (√majj), rugṇà, vigna
(beside vikta). Further, two or three ending in c (similarly treated):
thus, okná (√ac or añc: also acita and añcita), vṛkṇá (√vraśc),
and apparently -pṛgṇa (RV., once: with doubly irregular change of rootfinal, from √pṛc). And one root in g, lagna.
957—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 344
d. A considerable number, some of them very common ones, of roots
in d (which, against ordinary rule, becomes n before the suffix: 157b).
The forms are: unna (also utta), arṇṇaP, klinna, kṣunṇa, kṣviṇṇa,
khinna, channa, chinná, chṛṇṇá, tunná, tṛṇṇá, nunna (also nuttá
and nudita), panná, bhinná, vinna (√vid find: also vittá), śanna
(√śad fall), sonná (also sattá), skanná (√skand), syonná (√syand),
svinná, hanna. And ánna food, in spite of its different accent, appears
to be a like formation from √ad eat.
958. The native grammarians reckon as participles ofthis formation a few miscellaneous derivative adjectives, coming from roots
which do not make a regular participle: such are kṣāma burnt, kṛśá
emaciated, pakvá ripe, phullá expanded,śúṣka dry.
Past Active Participle in tavant (or navant).
959. From the past passive participle, of whatever
formation, is made, by adding the possessive suffix ~~
vant, a secondary derivative having the meaning and construction of a perfect active participle: for example, FT"
e-hcHM tat kṛtávān having done that; taṁ nigīrṇavān having
swallowed him down. Its inflection is like that of other
derivatives made with this suffix (452 ff.);itsfeminine ends
in 5fcft vatī; its accent remains on the participle.
960. Derivative words of this formation are found in RV., but without
anything like a participial value. The A V. has a single example, with participial meaning: aśitā́vaty átithāu one's guest having eaten (loc. abs‚).
In the Brāhmaṇas also it is hardly met with. In the later language,
however, it comes to be quite common. And there it is chiefly used pre¬
dicatively, and oftenest without copula expressed, or with the value of a
personal verb-form in a past tense: primarily, and not seldom, signifying
immediate past, or having a true "perfect" value; but also (like the old
perfect and the old aorist in later use) coming to be freely used for indefinite time, or with the value of the imperfect (779), For example:
māṁ na kaścid dṛṣṭavān no one has seen (or saw) me; sa nakulaṁ
vyāpāditavān he destroyed the ichneumon; or, with copula, mahat
kṛcchram prāptavaty asithou hast fallen upon great misery. Although
originally and properly made only from transitive verbs (with an object, to
which the participle in ta stands in the relation of an objective predicate),
it is finally found also from intransitives: thus, cūtena saṁśritavatī
(Ś.) has become united with the mango-tree; gatavatī (ib.) she has gone.
a. The same participle is also made in the secondary conjugations:
e. g. darśitavant having shown, prabodhitavant having awakened.
3 4 5 GERUNDIVES. [-963
b. Possessives also in in made from passive participles are sometimes found used in an analogous manner, nearly as perfect active participles: e. g. iṣṭín having sacrificed, vijitino manyamānāḥ (AB.) thinking
themselves to have conquered.
Future Passive Participles: Gerundives.
961. Certain derivative adjectives (for the most part
more OT less clearly secondary derivatives) have acquired in
the language a value as qualifying something which is to,
or which ought to, suffer the action expressed by the root
from which they come; and they are allowed to be made
from every verb. Hence they are, like more proper participles, sometimes treated as a part of the general verbal
system, and called future passive participles, or gerundives
(like the Latin forms in ndus, to which they correspond in
meaning).
962. The suffixes by which such gerundives are regularly and ordinarily made are three: namely 7J ya, cT~J ta¬
vya, and ERfa anīya.
a. Derivatives in ya having this value are made in all periods of
the language, from the earliest down; the other two are of more modern
origin, being entirely wanting in the oldest Veda (RV.), and hardly known
in the later. Other derivatives of a similar character, which afterward disappear from use, are found in the Veda (966).
963. The suffix ya in its gerundive use has nothing to distinguish it from the same suffix as employed to make adjectives
and nouns of other character (see below, 1213). And it exhibits also
the same variety in the treatment of the root.
a. The original value of the suffix is ia‚ and as such it has to be
read in the very great majority of its Vedic occurrences. Hence the conversion of e and o to ay and av before it (see below).
b. Thus: 1. Final ā becomes e before the suffix: déya, dhyeya,
khyéya, méya (perhaps dā́-ia etc, with euphonic y interposed); but
RV. has once -jñāya. — 2. The other vowels either remain unchanged, or have the guṇa or the vṛddhi strengthening; and e usually
and o always are treated before the ya as they would be before a
vowel: thus, -kṣayya, jáyya, bháyya, lāyya; návya, bhávya, hávya,
bhāvyá; vā́rya: and, in the later language, nīya, jeya, dhūya (such
cases are wanting earlier). In a few instances, a short vowel adds t
963—] XIII. VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 3 4 6
before the suffix: thus, itya, mitya, śrútya, stútya, kṛtya (the only
Vedic examples). —3. Medial a remains unchanged or is lengthened:
thus, dábhya, vándya, sádya; mā́dya, vā́cya. — 4. Medial i-, u-,
‚and ṛ-vowels are unchanged or have the guṇa-strengthening: thus,
ī́ḍya, gúhya, dhṛṣya; dvéṣya, yódhya, márjya.
c. The RV. has about forty examples of this gerundive, and the
A V. adds half as many more. Except in bhāviá (once), the accent in
RV. is always on the root; A V. has several cases of accent on the i of the
suffix (hence written ādyà, āśyà, -vyādhyà, -dharṣyà). According to
the grammarians, the accent is on the root or else the ending is circum¬
flexed: always the former, if the ya follow a vowel.
964. a. The suffix tavya is a secondary adjective derivative
from the infinitival noun in tu (below, 968), made by adding the
suffix ya (properly ia, whence the accent yà), before which the final
u, as usual (1203 a), hasguṇa-strengthening,and is resolved into av.
b. Hence, asregards both the form taken by the root and the
use or omission of an auxiliary vowel i before the tavya, the rules
are the same asfor the formation ofthe infinitive (below, 968).
c. No example of this formation is found in RV., and in AV. occur
only two, jonitavyà and hiṃsitavyà. In the Brāhmaṇa language it begins to be not rare, and is made both from the simple root and from the
derived conjugational stems (next chapter); in the classical language it is
still more frequent. According to the grammarians, the accent of the word
is either circumflex on the final or acute on the penult: thus, kartavyà
or kartávya; in the accentuated texts, it is always the former (the accent
távya given to certain gerundives in the Petersburg lexicons is an error,
growing out ofthe ambiguous accentuation of ŚB.: 88 c).
965. a. The suffix anīya isin like manner the product of secondary derivation, made by adding the adjective suffix īya (1215)
to a nomen actionis formed by the common suffix ana.
b. It follows, then, asregards itsmode of formation, the rules
for the suffix ana (below, 1150).
c. This derivative also is unknown in RV., and in AV. is found only
in upajīvanī́ya and āmantranī́ya (in both of which, moreover, its distinct gerundive value admits of question). In the Brāhmaṇas (where less
than a dozen examples ofit have been noted), and in the later language,
it is less common than the gerundive in tavya. Its accent, as in all the
derivatives with the suffix īya, is on the penult: thus, karaṇīya.
966. Other formations of kindred value are found in the Veda as
follows:
a. Gerundives in tua or tva, apparently made from the infinitival
noun in tu with the added suffix a (1209). They are kártua (in two
occurrences kártva), -gaṁtva, jántua, jétua, náṁtua, váktua, sótua,
347 INFINITIVES. [—968
snátua, hántua, hétua, hótva; and, with auxiliary i (or ī), jánitva,
sánitva, bhávītva.
b. Gerundives in enia or enya (compare 1217): they are īkṣeṇía,
īḍénia, caréṇia, dṛśénia, -dviṣeṇia, bhūṣéṇya, yudhénia, váreṇia
(and bhajenya BhP.); with one example from an apparent aorist-stem,
yaṁsénya, and three or four from secondary verb-stems (see below, 1019,
1038, 1068 a).
c. Gerundives in ā́yia (once ā́yya: compare 1218): they are dak¬
ṣā́yia, panā́yia, vidā́yia, śravā́yia, hnavāyia; with a few from secondary,conjugation-stems (below, 1019, 1038, 1051, 1068a); and stuṣéyia
is of close kindred with them.
d. A few adjectives in elima, as pacelima, bhidelima (only these
quotable), are reckoned as gerundives by the grammarians.
967. The division-line between participial and ordinary adjectives is less strictly drawn in Sanskrit than in the otherIndo-European languages. Thus, adjectives in u, as will be seen later (1178),
from secondary conjugational stems, have participial value; and in
the Brāhmaṇas (with an example or two in AV.) is found widely and
commonly used a participial adjective formed with the suffix uka
(1180).
Infinitives.
968. The later language has only a single infinitive,
which is the accusative case of a verbal noun formed by
the suffix cT tu, added to the root usually directly, but often
also with aid of the preceding auxiliary vowel ^ i. The form
of the infinitive ending, therefore, is cT^tum or J^iT itiam.
The root has the guṇa-strengthening, and is accented. Thus,
for example, ^TJ-T^ótum from √^ i; ^cTR^ kartum from √~
ky; ^Í^H^cáritum from √ET~" car; 3-ffi|Hr^bhavitum from
√ī bhū.
a. As regards the use or omission of i, the infinitive (as also
the gerund in tvā: 991) follows in general the analogy of the passive participle (956). Examples are (with the gerund added) as follows: dagdhá, dágdhum, dagdhvā́ from √dah; bhinná, bhéttum,
bhittvā́ from √bhid; matá, mántum, matvā́ from √man; ūḍhá,
vóḍhum, ūḍhvā́ from √vah; patitá, pátitum, patitvā́ from √pat;
yācitá, yā́citum, yācitvā́ from √yāc; śayitá, śáyitum, śayitvā́ from
√śī. But certain exceptions and special cases require notice. Thus:
b. Of roots having no quotable participle, infinitive stems in tu are
made from ad, sagh; in itu from uñch, ūh consider, kṣap, luṇṭh,
lok, svar; and in both from yabh.
968—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS . 348
c. Of roots making participles of both forms, an infinitive stem in
tu only is quotable for kṣip, kṣubh, tap, tyaj, mṛś, lubh, vas shine,
śak, stabh; only in itu for gāh, carv, jap, mad, yat, van, śaṃs,
śvas; in both for as throw, ūh remove, gup, car, mṛj (mā́rṣṭu, mār¬
jitu), lap, vas dwell, śap, śās.
d. Also in a number of other cases (besides those already noticed) an
infinitive stem is made both with and without i. Thus, in addition to the
more regular form, a stem in itu is occasionally met with from roots aś
attain, iṣ seek, bandh, bhaj, yaj (ījitum), rudh obstruct, ruh, vṛṣ,
sad (sīditum), sah, han, hṛ; and one in tu from roots ās, bhāṣ, vid
know. Both forms occur also from certain am-roots, Damely nam, yam,
ram, and, with ā before tu as in the pple, kram and bhram (kṣam
has only kṣaṁtu, against the analogy of kṣāṁta); further, from certain
roots in variable ṛ, namely tṛ (tartu, tarītu), vṛ cover (vártu, varītu),
and stṛ (stártu, staritu, stárītu) (but from śṛ crush occur only śárītu,
śaritu, and from vṛ choose only varītu; while gṛ swallow and pṛ fill
make their infinitive from other root-forms, namely giritum, pūritum);
further, from a few vowel-roots, namely nī, cyu, sū (sū́tu); and finally
from kṛṣ, nṛt, cue.
e. Against the analogy of the participle, infinitive-stems in itu after
a final consonant are made from the roots av, kṣan, khan and jan (the
pples coming from khā and jā), guh, jabh, tam, dīv play and dīv
lament (both devitu), majj, vṛt, vṛdh, sṛp; and after a final vowel,
from roots in ū, namely pū, bhū, sū (also sūtu), and from śri and śvi;
as to roots in variable ṛ, see just above, d.
f. As the infinitive is made from the (accented and) strengthened
root, so it naturally has, as a Tule, the stronger or fuller root-form where
a weaker or contracted form is taken by the participle (and gerund in
tvā́): e, g. váktu against uktá (and uktvā́), yáṣṭu against iṣṭá (and
iṣṭvā́), banddhum against baddhá (and baddhvā́), and so on. Deserving special notice are gātu (√gā sing) against gītá, and dhā́tu (√dhā
suck) against dhītá; and so from dā give and hā leave are made only
dā́tu and hātu; but dhā put, mā measure, and sthā add to the regular
dhātu, mātu, sthātu the late forms -dhitu, -mitu, -sthitu; and sā
or si has sātu, sétu, and -situ; vā weave (pple utá) has both vā́tu
and ótu; hū or hvā has havītu, hváyitu, and hvātu. The root vyadh
makes its only quotable infinitive, veddhum, from its vidh-form; from
sañj or saj occur both saṅktu and saktu. The anomalous epic forms
ījitum (√yaj) and sīditum (√sad), were mentioned above. The root
grah makes gráhītum.
g. In the later language, the infinitive-stem forms possessive compounds with kāma and manas (especially the former): e. g. svaptu¬
kāma having the wish to sleep, yaṣṭukāma desirous of sacrificing, vaktu¬
manas minded to speak.
h. In very rare instances, dative infinitives in tave or tavāi are
349 INFINITIVES. [-970
made from the infinitive stem in the later language (as abundantly in the
earlier: 970b): thus, pratihartave (BhP.). And jīvase (973a) is
once found in MBh. (i. 3. 67 = 732), in a quasi-Vedi chymn to the Aśvins.
969. In the Veda and Brāhmaṇa, however, a number of verbal
nouns, nomina actionis, in various of their cases, are used in constructions which assimilate them to the infinitive of other languages
— although, were it not for these other later and more developed
and pronounced infinitives, the constructions in question might pass
as ordinary case-constructions of a somewhat peculiar kind.
970. The nouns thus used infinitively are the following:
a. The root-noun, without derivative suffix, is so used in its
accusative in am, its dative in e or (from ā-roots) āi, its genitive
and ablative in as, and its locative in i.
b. The verbal noun in tu is so used in its accusative in tum,
its dative in tave or tavāí, and its ablative and genitive in tos.
Of other nouns only single cases, generally datives, are reckoned as
used with infinitive value; thus:
c. From the verbal noun in as, the dative in ase; and also, in
an extremely small number of instances, a dative in se (or ṣe), from
a noun formed with s simply.
d. From nouns in man and van, datives in mane and vane.
e. From nouns in ti, datives in taye, or (from one or two verbs)
in tyāi.
f. From nouns in i, datives in áye.
g. From nouns in dhi and ṣi, datives in dhyāi and ṣyāi.
h. A few infinitives in ṣaṇi are perhaps locatives from nouns
in an added to a root increased by s.
i. From a single root, dhṛ, are made infinitively used forms in
tári, of which the grammatical character is questionable.
j . Among all these, the forms which have best right to special treatment as infinitives, on account of being of peculiar formation, or from
suffixes not found in other uses, or for both reasons, are those in ṣe,
ṣaṇi, tari- dhyāi, and tavāi.
k. Except the various cases of the derivative in tu, and of the rootnoun, these infinitives are almost wholly unknown outside the Rig-Veda.
I. Other suffixes and forms than those noticed above might be added;
for it is impossible to draw any fixed line between the uses classed as
infinitive and the ordinary case-uses: thus, prajā́patim praśnám āitām
(TS.) they went to ask Prajāpati; víśvaṁ jīvám prasuvántī carā́yāi
(RV.) quickening every living being to motion; apáḥ sármāya codáyan
(RV.) impelling the waters to flow; śaknuyā́d gráhaṇāya (instead of the
usual gráhītum: ŚB.) may be able to apprehend; ā tamanāt (instead of
the usual tamitoḥ: S.) until exhaustion. And the so-called infinitives
970—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS . 350
aTe found coordinated in the same sentence with common nouns, and even
with compound nouns: e. g. cáritave... ābhogáya iṣṭáye rāyé (RV.)
to go abroad, to enjoy, to seek wealth; ārtatrāṇāya na prahartum
anāgasi (Ś.) for the rescue of the distressed, not for hurling at the innocent.
More special rules as to the various formations are as follows:
971. The root-noun used as infinitive has the same form (except
that it does not take an added t: 383 f), and the same accent, both when
simple and when combined with prepositions, as in its other uses. In the
very great majority of instances, it is made from roots ending in a consonant; but also from a few in ā (khyā, dā, dhā, pā?, mā, yā), from
two or three in i– and u-vowels (hi, mī, bhū), and from one or two in
changeable ṛ, which takes the ir-form (tir, stir).
a. The roots in ā form the accus. in ām, the dat. in āi, the abl. in
ās (understanding avasā́ before a as for avasā́s and not avasāí in RV.
iii. 53. 20), and the locative in e (only two examples, of which one is perhaps better understood as dative).
972. The infinitive noun in tu is made freely from roots of every
form. The root takes the guṇa-strengthening, if capable of it, and often
adds the auxiliary vowel i before the suffix (according to the rules already
stated, 968). The root is accented, unless the noun be combined with a
preposition, in which case the latter has the accent instead: thus, kártum,
étave, hántos; but níkartum, níretave, nírhantos.
a. The dative in tavāi is in two respects anomalous: in having the
heavy feminine ending āi along with a strengthened u; .and in taking a
double accent, one on the root or on the prefixed preposition, and the
other on the ending āi: thus, étavāí, hántavāí, átyetavāí, ápabhar¬
tavāí.
973. a. The infinitive in ase is made in RV. from about twentyfive roots; in AV. and later there have been noted no other examples of
it. In near three quarters of the cases, the accent is on the suffix: e. g.
ṛñjáse, jīváse, bhiyáse, tujáse; the exceptions are cákṣase; dhā́yase
(with y inserted before the suffix: 258); and áyase, bhárase, spárase,
hárase (with guṇa-strengthening of the root). Strengthening of the root
is also shown by javáse, doháse, bhojáse, śobháse. In puṣyáse is
seen, apparently, the present-stem instead of the root.
b. The ending se is extremely rare, being found only in jiṣé and
perhaps stuṣé, and one or two still more doubtful cases.
974. Infinitives in mane are made from only five roots: thus, trā́¬
maṇe, dā́mane, dármaṇe, bhármaṇe, and (with different accent) vid¬
máne. From √dā comes dāváne; turváṇe may come directly from √tṛ,
or through the secondary root turv; dhū́rvaṇe is rather from √dhūrv
than from √dhvṛ.
975. a. The infinitives in taye are iṣṭáye (√iṣ), pītáye (√pā
drink), vītáye, sātáye, and perhaps ūtáye (ūtáye nṛ́n to help his men:
351 INFINITIVES. [—981
(RV.). In tyāi, the only examples noted are ityāí (RV.) and sā́ḍhyāi
(MS. AB.).
b. With aye are formed iṣáye, tujáye, dṛśáye, maháye, yudháye,
sanáye; and citáye (VS.), gṛhaye (K.).
976. The ending dhyāi is, more than any other, irregular and various in its treatment. It has always an a before it; and in the majority
of cases it is accented upon this a, and added to a weak form of root:
thus, śucádhyāi, pṛṇádhyāi, dhiyádhyāi, huvádhyāi. But the form
of root is the strong one in a few cases: namely, śayádhyāi, stavádh¬
yāi, tarádhyāi, jarádhyāi, mandádhyāi, vandádhyāi. In half-adozen forms, again, the root has the accent: namely, kṣáradhyāi, gámadh¬
yāi, yájadhyāi (but once or twice also yajádhyāi), váhadhyāi,
sáhadhyāi, bháradhyāi. In a single instance, píbadhyāi, the suffix
is added distinctly to a present-stem; and in one, vāvṛdhádhyāi, to a
perfect stem. Finally, in a number of instances (ten), this infinitive is
made from a causative stem in ay: thus, mādayádhyāi, riṣayádhyāi, etc.
a. This infinitive is by no means rare in RV., being made in thirtyfive different forms (with seventy-two occurrences). But it is hardly known
outside of the RV.; the A V. has it but once (in a passage found also in
RV.); and elsewhere half-a-dozen examples have been noticed, in mantrapassages (one of them TS. falsely reads gámadhye); in the Brāhmaṇa
language proper it appears to be entirely wanting.
977. An example or two are met with of an infinitive in ṣyāi: thus,
róhiṣyāi (TS.), avyathiṣyāi (K. Kap.; MS. avyáthiṣe; VS. vyathiṣat),
and perhaps -dhāsyāi (PGS.).
978. The infinitives in ṣaṇi are: iṣáṇi (?) from √iṣ send, -bhū¬
ṣáṇi from √bhū; śūṣáṇi from √śū or śvā; neṣáṇi from √nī; sak¬
ṣáṇi from √sah; parṣáṇi from √pṛ, tarīṣáṇi from √tṛ; and gṛṇīṣáṇi
and -stṛṇīṣáṇi from √√gṛ and stṛ — the last containing evident present
tense-signs (compare the 1st sing, gṛṇīṣé, 894 d).
979. The only infinitive in tari is dhartári (with its compound
vidhartári), from √dhṛ.
Uses of the Infinitives.
980. The uses of the so-called infinitives are for the most part
closely accordant with those of the corresponding cases from other
abstract nouns. Thus:
981. The accusative, which is made only from the root-noun
and the noun in tu‚ is used as object of a verb.
a. Especially, of forms from the root śak be able, and arh be worthy,
have the right or the power. Thus, śakéma tvā samídham (RV.) may
we accomplish thy kindling; mā́śakan pratidhā́m íṣum (AV.) may they
not be able to fit the arrow to the string; máno vā́imā́ṁ sadyáḥ páry-
981—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 352
āptum arhati mánaḥ páribhavitum (TS.) the mind, forsooth, can at
once attain and surpass her; kó hy étásyā́ 'rhati gúhyaṁ nā́ma grá¬
hītum (ŚB.) for who is worthy to take his secret name? In the Veda, the
construction with these verbs is only one among others; in the Brāhmaṇa,
it becomes the greatly prevalent one (three quarters or more of all the cases).
b. Further, of verbs of motion (next most frequent case): thus,
dā́kṣiṇāni hótum eti (TS.) he goes to sacrifice things pertaining to sacrificial gifts; índram pratíram emy ā́yuḥ (RV.) I go to Indva for (i. e.
beseech of him) the lengthening out of life; — of √dhṛ persist in, under¬
take: as, sá idáṁ jātáḥ sárvam evá dágdhuṁ dadhre (ŚB.) he, as
soon as born, began to burn this universe; — of verbs meaning desire, hope,
notice, know, and the like: as, pā́śān vicṛ́taṁ vettha sárvān (AV.)
thou knowest how to loosen all bonds; tásmād agníṁ nā́“ driyeta pári¬
hantum (ŚB.) therefore one should not be careful to smother the fire; —
and of others.
982. Of the infinitive datives, the fundamental and usual sense
is that expressed by for, in order to, for the purpose of.
Examples are: víśvaṁ jīváṁ caráse bodháyantī (RV.) awakening
every living creature to motion; tā́n úpa yāta píbadhyāi (RV.) come to
drink them; nāí 'tā́ṁ te devā́ adadur áttave (AV.) the gods did not
give her to thee for eating; prāí "d yudháye dásyum índraḥ (RV.)
Indra went forward to fight the demon; cákṣur no dhehi vikhyāí (RV.)
giue us sight for looking abroad.
Some peculiar constructions, however, grow out of this use of the infinitive dative. Thus:
a. The noun which is logically the subject or the object of the action
expressed by the infinitive is frequently put beside it in the dative (by a
construction which is in part a perfectly simple one, but which is stretched
beyond its natural boundaries by a kind of attraction): thus, cakāra
sū́ryāya pánthām ánvetavā́ u (RV.) he made a track for the sun to
follow (made for the sun a track for his following); śíśīte śṛ́ṅge rákṣobhyo
viníkṣe (RV.) he whets his horns to pierce the demons; rudrā́ya dhánur
ā́ tanomi brahmadvíṣe śárave hántavā́ u (RV.) I stretch the bow
for Rudra, that with his arrow he may slay the brahma-hater; asmá¬
bhyaṁ dṛśáye sū́ryāya púnar dātām ásum (RV.) may they grant
life again, that we may see the sun.
b. An infinitive with √kṛ make is used nearly in the sense of a
causative verb: thus, prā́ 'ndháṁ śroṇáṁ cákṣasa étave kṛthah (RV.)
ye make the blind and lame to see and go; agníṁ samídhe cokártha
(RV.) thou hast made the fire to be kindled. Of similar character is an occasional construction with another verb: as, yád īm uśmási kártave
kárat tat (RV.) what we wish to be done, may he do that; kavīṃr
icchāmi saṁdṛ́śe (RV.) I desire to see the sages.
c. A dative infinitive is not seldom used as a predicate, sometimes
353 USE S OF T H E INFINITIVES . [—984
with, but more usually without, a copula expressed: thus ‚ agnír iva ná
pratidhṛ́ṣe bhavati (TS.) like fire, he is not to be resisted; mahima te
anyéna ná saṁnáśe (VS.) thy greatness is not to be attained by another;
nákīm índro níkartave ná śakráḥ páriśaktave (RV.) 7ndra is not
to be put down, the mighty one is not to be overpowered.
d. Sometimes an infinitive so used without a copula has quite nearly
the value of an, imperative: thus, tyā́ me yaśásā... āuśijó huvá¬
dhyāi [asti] (RV.) these glorious ones shall the son of JJśij invoke for me;
sūktébhir vaḥ... índrā nv àgnī́ ávase huvádhyāi [staḥ] (RV.) with
your hymns shall ye call now on Indra and Agni for aid; vandádhyā
agníṁ námobhiḥ [asmi] (RV.) let me'greet Agni with homage; asmā́kā¬
saś ca sūráyo víśvā ā́śās tarīṣáṇi (RV.) and let our sacrificers cross
all regions; tán nāí
J
váṁ kártavāí (MS.) that must not be done so;
brahmadvíṣaḥ. śárave hántavā́ u (RV.) let the arrow slay the brahmahaters. The infinitives in dhyāi and ṣaṇi (which latter is in all its uses
accordant with datives) are those in which the imperative value is most
distinctly to be recognized.
e. In the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras (especially in ŚB.) the dative in tavāi
is not seldom used with a verb signifying speak (brū, vac, ah), to express
the ordering of anything to be done : thus, tásmād óṣadhīnām evá mū́lāny
úcchettavāí brūyāt (ŚB.) therefore let him direct the roots of the plants
to be cut up (speak in order to their cutting up: cf. yé vaśā́yā ádānāya
vádanti who dissuade from giving the cow: AV.).
983. The ablative infinitive — which, like the accusative, is
made only from the root-noun and that in tu — is found especially
with the prepositions ā́ until and purā́ before.
a. Thus, a íámitoḥ (TS. etc.) until exhaustion; purā́ vācáḥ prá¬
vaditoḥ (TS.) before utterance of the voice. In the Brāhmaṇa language,
this is the well-nigh exclusive construction of the ablative (it occurs also
with prāk, arvāk, etc.); in the Veda, the latter is used also after ṛté
without, and after several verbs, as trā and pā protect, yu separate, bhī, etc.
b. In a few instances, by an attraction similar to that illustrated
above for the dative (982a), a noun dependent on this infinitive is put in
the ablative beside it: thus, purā vāgbhyaḥ sampravaditoḥ (PB.)
before the utterance together of the voices; trā́dhvaṁ kartā́d avapádaḥ
(RV.) save us from falling down into the pit; purā dakṣiṇābhyo netoḥ
(Āpast.) before the gifts are taken away.
984. The genitive infinitive (having the same form as the ablative) is in common use in the Brāhmaṇa language as dependent on
īśvará lord, master, employed adjectively in the sense of capable or
likely or exposed to.
a. Examples are: tā́ [devátāḥ] īśvarā́ enam pradáhaḥ (TS.)
they are likely to bum him up; átha ha vā́ īśvarô 'gníṁ citvā́ kíṁ¬
cid dāuritám ā́pattor ví vā hválitoḥ (ŚB.) so in truth he is liable,
984—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 354
after piling the fire, to meetwith some mishap or other, or to stagger;
iśvaraṁ vāi rathantaram udgātuś cakṣuḥ pramathitoḥ (PB.) the
rathantara is liable to knock out the eye of the chanter.
b. The dative is used in ŚB. instead of the genitive in a single
phrase (īśvarāú jánayitavāí); and, in the later language, sometimes the
accusative in tum. In a case or two the masc. sing. nom. īśvaraḥ is
used, without regard to the gender or number of the word which it qualifies:
thus, tásye "śvaráḥ prajā́ pā́pīyasī bhávitoḥ (ŚB.) his progeny is
liable to deteriorate. And in a very few instances the word īśvara is
omitted, and the genitive has the same value without it: thus, dve madhy¬
aṁdinam abhi pratyetoh (AB.) two may be added to the noon libation ;
táto dīkṣitáḥ pāmanó bhávitoh (ŚB.) then the consecrated is liable
to get the itch.
c. This construction with īśvara, which is the only one for the genitive infinitive in the Brāhmaṇa, is unknown in the Veda, where the genitive is found in a very small number of examples with madhyā́, and with
the root īś: thus, madhyā́ kártoḥ (RV.) in the midst of action; ī́śe
rāyó dā́toḥ (RV.) he is master of the giving of wealth; īśe yótoh (RV.)
is able to keep away.
985. Unless the infinitives in ṣaṇi and tari are locative in form
(their uses are those of datives), the locative infinitive is so rare, and has
so little that is peculiar in its use, that it is hardly worth making any
account of. An example is uṣáso budhí (RV.) at the awakening of the
dawn.
986. In the Veda, the dative infinitive forms are very much
more numerous than the accusative (in RV., their occurrences are
twelve times as many; in AV., more than three times); and the accusative in tum is rare (only four forms in RV., only eight in AV.).
In the Brāhmaṇas, the accusative has risen to much greater comparative frequency (its forms are nearly twice as many as those of the
dative); but the ablative-genitive, which is rare in the Veda, has
also come to full equality with it. The disappearance in the classical
language of all excepting the accusative in tum (but see 968h) is a
matter for no small surprise.
987. The later infinitive in tum is oftenest used in constructions
corresponding to those of the earlier accusative: thus, na vāṣpam
aśakat soḍhum he could not restrain his tears; taṁ draṣṭum arhasi
thou oughtest to see it; prāptum icchanti they desire to obtain; saṁ¬
khyātum ārabdham having begun to count. But also, not infrequently,
in those of the other cases. So, especially, of the dative: thus,
avasthātuṁ sthānāntaraṁ cintaya devise another place to stay in;
tvām anveṣṭum ihā "gataḥ he has come hither to seek for thee; -—
but likewise of the genitive: thus, samartho gantum capable of
going; saṁdhātum īśvaraḥ able to mend. Even a construction as
nominative is not unknown: thus, yuktaṁ tasya mayā samāśvā-
355 GERUNDS . [—990
sayitum bhāryām (MBh.) it is proper for me to comfort his wife;
na naptāraṁ svayaṁ nyāyyaṁ śaptum evam (R.) it is not suitable
thus to curse one's own grandson; tad vaktuṁ na pāryate (Śatr.) it
is not possible to say that.
988. In the later language, as in the earlier, the infinitive in certain connections has what we look upon as a passive value. Thus, kartum
ārabdhaḥ begun to be made; śrotuṁ na yujyate ii is not -fit to be heard
(for hearing). This is especially frequent along with the passive forms
of √śak: thus, tyaktuṁ na śakyate it cannot be abandoned; śakyāv
ihā "netum they two can be brought hither; na ca vibhūtayah śak¬
yam avāptum ūrjitāḥ nor are mighty successes a thing capable of being
attained.
Gerunds.
989. The so-called gerund is a stereotyped case (doubtless instrumental) of a verbal noun, used generally as adjunct to the logical subject of a clause, denoting an accompanying or (more often) a preceding action to that signified
by the verb of the clause. It has thus the virtual value of
an indeclinable participle, present or past, qualifying the
actor whose action it describes.
a. Thus, for example: śrutvāi 'va cā 'bruvan and hearing (or
having heard) they spoke; tebhyaḥ pratijñāyā 'thai 'tān paripapraccha having given them his promise, he then questioned them.
990. The gerund is made in the later language by one
of the two suffixes ~ f tvā and U ya, the former being used
with a simple root, the latter with one that is compounded
with a prepositional prefix — or, rarely, with an element
of another kind, as adverb or noun.
a. To this distribution of uses between the two suffixes there are
occasional exceptions. Thus, gerunds in ya from simple roots are not
very rare in the epic language (e. g. gṛhya, uṣya [√vas dwell], arcya,
īkṣya, cintya, tyajya, lakṣya; also from causatives and denominatives,
as vācya, yojya, plāvya), and are not unknown elsewhere (e. g. arcya
and īkṣya M,, prothya AGS., sthāpya ŚvU.). And gerunds in tvā
from compounded roots are met with in considerable numbers from AV.
(only pratyarpayitvā́) down: e. g. samīrayitvā́ MS., virocayitvā́
TA., utkṣiptvā U,, pratyuktvā E., pratyasitvā S., prahasitvā
MBh., saṁdarśayitvā MBh., vimuktvā R., nivedayitvā R., proktvā
Pane, anupītvā VBS.: the great majority of them are made from the
causative stem.
990—: XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS . 3 5 6
b. The preflxion of the negative particle, a or an, does not cause
the gerund to take the form in ya: thus, akṛtva, anīrayitvā (but R.
has acintya). Of compounds with other than verbal prefixes, RV. has
punardā́ya, kamagṛ́hya, pādagṛ́hya, hastagṛ́hya, araṁkṛ́tya,
akkhalīkṛ́tya, mithaspṛ́dhya; A V. has further namaskṛ́tya.
991. The suffix ~7 tvā has the accent. It is usually
added directly to the root, but often also with interposition
of the auxiliary vowel ^ i — with regard to which, as well
as to the form of the root before it, the formation nearly
agrees with that of the participle in rT ta (952 ff).
a. Examples of the general accordance of passive participle, infinitive, and gerund in regard to the use of i were given above,
968a; further specifications are called for, as follows:
b. The quotable roots in variable ṛ (242) change it to īr: thus,
tīrtvā́, stīrtvā́ (also stṛtvā́); and car makes also cīrtvā (like cīrṇa);
— roots in ā show in general the same weakening as in the participle;
but from dhā put is quotable only dhitvā́, from mā measure mitvā́ and
mītvā, from dā give only dattvā́, from chā chāyitvā; — of roots in
am, kram and bhram and yam make forms both with and without i
(as in the infinitive), but ram has ratvā́ and raṁtvā, and dam and
vam make damitvā and vamitvā.
0« The auxiliary vowel is taken by roots gras, muṣ, cap, and śās
(śāsitvā) (whose participles have both forms); also by cāy, nṛt (nar¬
titvā), lag, and svaj (against analogy of pple); and cue makes śocitvā.
On the other hand, from ruj (rugria) and vraśc (vṛkṇa) come ruktvā́
and vṛṣṭvā́. And both forms are made (as also in infinitive or participle)
from car, vas dwell (uṣṭvā, uṣitvā́), nī (nītvā́, nayitvā), and mṛj
(mṛṣṭvā́, mārjitvā),
d. While the formation is in general one requiring, like the passive
participle (e. g. uptvā, like uptá; uditvā́, like uditá), a weak or weakened
root, there are some cases in which it is made from a strong or strengthened root-form. Thus (besides the instances already given: chāyitvā,
raṁtvā, śāsitvā, cāyitvā, śocitvā, nayitvā, mārjitvā), we find
charditvā (Āpast.), daṃṣṭvā, and spharitvā, and, from a number of
roots, a second strong form beside the more Tegular weak one: namely,
aùktvā, bhaṅktvā, bhuṅktvā, syanttvā (beside aktvā́ etc.); cayitvā,
smayitvā, smaritvā (beside citvā́ etc.); roditvā (beside ruditvā),
and siñcitvā (beside siktvā). The last shows the influence of the
present-stem; as do also mārjitvā (above) and jighritvā (√ghrā). The
form ṣṭhutvā (Āpast.) is doubtless a false reading, for ṣṭhyūtvā.
992. The suffix 7J ya is added directly to the root,
which is accented, but has its weak form. A root ending
357 GERUN D I N ya. [—993
in a short vowel takes r " t y a instead of 7J y a : thus, flrfTT
-jitya, FrTrīī -stútya , -kṛ́tya .
a. Roots in variable ṛ (242) change that vowel to īr or ūr: thus,
kīrya, gī́rya, tīrya (and tū́rya), dī́rya, pūrya, śī́rya, stī́rya (also
stṛtya); — roots in ā have for the most part -āya; but dhā suck makes
dhīya, and double forms are found from gā sing (gāya, gī́ya), pā drink
(pā́ya, pīya), dā give (dā́ya, dádya), dā divide (dā́ya, ditya), mā
measure, exchange (mā́ya, mítya), sā bind (sā́ya, sya); lī cling has
lā́ya or līya, as if an ā-verb ; and khan and dham make khāya and
dhmā́ya, from their ā-forms ; — the roots in an and am making their
participle in ata (954 d) make the gerund in atya, but also later in anya,
amya (e. g. gátya, gamya; hátya, hanya; but tan makes as second
form tāya, and from ram only ramya is quotable); — the roots in īv
add ya to their īv-form: thus, ṣṭhīvya, sī́vya; — a few roots in i and
u add ya to the lengthened vowel besides adding tya: thus, i go (īya,
ítya; also ayya), ci gather (cīya, cítya), and plu, yu unite, su, stu
(plū́ya, plutya, etc.); while kṣi destroy has only kṣī́ya.
b. This gerund, though accented on the root-syllable, is generally
a weakening formation: thus are made, without a strengthening nasal found
in some other forms, ácya, ájya, idhya, údya, ubhya, grathya, tácya,
daśya, bádhya, bhajya, lípya, lúpya, vlágya, śrabhya, sajya,
skábhya, stábhya, syadya, svajya; with weakening of other kinds,
gṛ́hya and gṛ́bhya, pṛcchya, úcya, udya, úpya, úṣya (vas dwell),
úhya, vidhya, vī́ya, vṛścya, spṛ́dhya, hū́ya; — but from a number
of roots are made both a stronger and a weaker form: thus, manthya and
máthya, mārjya and mṛ́jya, rundhya and rúdhya, śaṃsya and śás¬
ya, śāsya and śiṣya, skándya and skádya, sráṃsya and srasya; —
and only strong forms are found from roots arc, av, cāy, śī (śayya), as
well as from certain roots with a constant nasal: e. g. uñch, kamp,
nand, lamb, śaṅk; isolated cases are oṣya (√uṣ burn), prothya (also
prúthya).
c. Other special cases are úhya and ūhya (√ūh remove), gurya and
gū́rya, gúhya and gūhya, rúhya and rūhya, bhramya and bhrāmya,
áyya (beside ítya, īya), ghrāya and jighrya; and ūrṇutya (beside
vṛ́tya).
993. The older language has the same two gerund formations,
having the same distinction, and used in the same way.
a. In RV., however, the final of ya is in the great majority of instances (fully two thirds) long (as if the instrumental ending of a derivative noun in i or ti). In AV,, long ā appears only once in aRV.
passage.
b. Instead of tvā alone, the Veda has three forms of the suffix,
namely tvā́, tvā́ya, and tvī́. Of these three, tvī́ is decidedly the commonest
in RV, (thirty-five occurrences, against twenty-one of tvā); but it is un-
993—] XIII . VERBA L ADJECTIVE S A N D NOUNS. 358
known in AV., and very rare elsewhere in the older language; 'tvā́ya is
found nine times in RV. (only once outside the tenth Book), twice in AV M
and but half-a-dozen times elsewhere (in ŚB., once from a causative stem:
spāśayitvā́ya). The historical relation of the three forms is obscure.
o. Two other gerund suffixes, tvānam and tvīnam, are mentioned
by the grammarians as of Vedic use, but they have nowhere been found
to occur.
994. The use of this gerund, though not changing in its character, becomes much more frequent, and even excessive, in the later
language.
a. Thus, in the Nala and Bhagavad-Gītā, which have only one tenth
as many verb-forms as RV., there are more than three times as many examples of the gerund as in the latter.
b. In general, the gerund is an adjunct to the subject of a sentence,
and expresses an act or condition belonging to the subject: thus, vajreṇa
hatvā́ nír apáḥ sasarja (RV.) smiting with his thunderbolt, he poured
forth the waters; pītvī́ sómasya vāvṛdhe (RV.) having drunk of the
soma, he waxed strong; té yajñásya rásaṁ dhītvā́ vidúhya yajñáṁ
yūpéna yopayitvā́ tirô 'bhavan (ŚB.) having sucked out the sap of the
offering, having milked the offering dry, having blocked it with the sacrificial
post, they disappeared; śrutvāi 'va cā 'bruvan (MBh.) and having heard,
they said; taṁ ca dūre dṛṣṭvā gardabhī 'yam iti matvā dhavitaḥ
(H.) and having- seen him in the distance, thinking ‘it is a she-assJ
, he ran,
c. But if the logical subject, the real agent, is put by the construction of the sentence in a dependent case, it is still qualified by the gerund: thus, stríyaṁ dṛṣṭvā́ya kitaváṁ tatāpa (RV.) it distresses the
gambler (i. e. the gambler is distressed) at seeing a woman; táṁ hāi 'noṁ
dṛṣṭvā́ bhī́r viveda (ŚB.) fear came upon him (i. e. he was afraid) when
he saw him; vidhāya proṣite vṛttim (M.) when he stays away after
providing for her support; kiṁ nu me syād idaṁ kṛtvā (MBh.) what,
I wonder, would happen to me if I did this; — and especially, when a passive form is given to the sentence, the gerund qualifies the agent in the
instrumental case (282 a): thus, tataḥ śabdad abhijñāya sa vyāgh¬
reṇa hataḥ (H.) thereupon he was slain by the tiger, who recognized him
by his voice; tvayā sa rājā śakuntalām puraskṛtya vaktavyaḥ (Ś.)
presenting Śakuntalā, thou must say to the king; haṃsānāṁ vacanaṁ
śrutvā yathā me (gen. for instr.) nāiṣadho vṛtaḥ (MBh.) as the Ni¬
shadhan was chosen by me on hearing the words of the swans: this construction is extremely common in much of the later Sanskrit.
d. Occasionally, the gerund qualifies an agent, especially an indefinite
one, that is unexpressed: thus, tadā 'trāi 'va paktvā khāditavyaḥ
(H.) then he shall be eaten [by us] cooking him on the spot; yad anyasya
parijñāya punar anyasya dīyate (M.) that, after being promised (lit.
when one has promised her) to one, she is given again to another; sucintya
co 'ktaṁ suvicārya yat kṛtam (H.) what one says after mature thought,
359 USE S OF T H E GERUNDS . [—995
and does "after full deliberation. Hence, still more elliptically, after alam:
thus, alaṁ vicārya (Ś.) enough of hesitation; tad alaṁ te vanaṁ
gatvā (R.) so have done with going to the forest.
e. Other less regular constructions are met with, especially in the
older language: thus, in the manner of a participle with man and the like
(268a), as táṁ hiṃsitvê 'va mene (ŚB.) he thought he had hurt him;
tā adbhir abhiṣicya nijāsyāi 'vā 'manyata (AB.) having sprinkled
them with water, he believed himself to have exhausted them; — in the manner of a participle forming a continuous tense with √i (1075 a), as indram
evāi 'tāir ārabhya yanti (AB.) by means of them they keep taking hold
of Indra; — as qualifying a subordinate member of the sentence, as puro¬
ḍā́śam evá kūrmám bhūtvā́ sárpantam (ŚB.) to the sacrificial cake
creeping about, having become a tortoise; ayodhyām . . . saphenām sa¬
svanām bhūtvā jalormim iva (R.) into Ayodhyā, like a surge that had
been foamy and roaring; — even absolutely, as ātithyéna vāí devā́
iṣṭvā́ tā́nt samád avindat (ŚB.) when the gods had sacrificed with the
guest-offering, strife befel them.
f. As in the two examples before the last, a predicate word with
bhūtvā is put in the same case with the subject: thus, further, tád
iyám evāì 'tád bhūtvā́ yajati (ŚB.) so having thus become this earth he
makes offering; yena vāmanenā 'pi bhūtvā (Vet.) by whom, even when
he had become a dwarf. The construction is a rare one.
g. A number of gerunds have their meaning attenuated sometimes to
the semblance of a preposition or adverb: such are adhikṛtya making a
subject of, i. e. respecting, of; ādāya, upāgṛhya taking, i. e. with; ud¬
diśya pointing toward, i. e. at; āsādya, arriving at, i. e. along, by;
ārabhya beginning, i.e. from; sambhūya being with, i . e.with; saṁhatya
striking together, i . e. in unison; prasahya using force, i . e. violently;
tyaktvā, parityajya, muktvā, vihāya, uddhṛtya, varjayitvā leaving
out etc., i. e. excepting, without; and others. Examples are: śakuntalām
adhikṛtya bravīmi (Ś.) I am speaking of Śakuntalā; tam uddiśya
kṣiptalaguḍaḥ (H.) having thrown the cudgel at him; nimittaṁ kiṁcid
āsādya (H.) for some reason or other.
h. The gerund is in the later language sometimes found in composition, as if a noun-stem: e. g. prasahyaharaṇa taking with violence;
pretyabhāva existence after death; vibhajyapāṭha separate enunciation;
sambhūyagamana going together. It is also often repeated (1260),' in a
distributive sense: e. g. sá vāí sammṛ́jya-sammṛjya pratápya-pra¬
tapya prá yacchati (ŚB.) in each case, after wiping and warming them,
he hands them over; gṛhītvā-gṛhītvā (KŚS.) at each taking; unnamyo¬
'nnamya (Pane.) every time that they arise.
Adverbial Gerund in am.
995. The accusative of a derivative nomen actionis in a, used
adverbially, assumes sometimes a value and construction so accord-
995--] XIV . SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION . 360
ant with that of the usual gerund that it cannot well be called by
a different name.
a. No example of a peculiar gerundial construction with such a form
occurs either in RV. or AV., although a dozen adverbial accusatives are to
be classed as representing the formation: thus, abhyākrā́mam, pratáṅ¬
kam, praṇódam, nilā́yam, abhiskándam, etc. This gerund is found
especially in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras, where it is not rare; in the epics
it is extremely infrequent; later, also, it occurs very sparingly.
b. A final vowel has vṛddhi-strengthening before the suffix: thus,
nāyam, śrāvam, kāram; final ā adds y: thus, khyāyam, yāyam; a
medial vowel has guṇa (if capable of it: 240): thus, kṣepam, krośam,
vartam (but īkṣam, pūram); a medial a before a single consonant is
lengthened: thus, krāmam, cāram, graham, svādam (but grantham,
lambham). The accent is on the radical syllable. No uncompounded examples are found in the older language, and extremely few in the later.
o. Examples are: kā́maṁ vā́ imā́ny áṅgāni vyatyā́saṁ śete
(ŚB.) he lies changing the position of these limbs at pleasure ; úttarām-ut¬
tarāṁ śā́khāṁ samālámbhaṁ róhet ÍŚB.) he would climb, taking hold
of a higher and ever a higher limb; aparīṣu mahānāgám ivā 'bhisaṁ¬
Sā́raṁ didṛkṣitā́raḥ (ŚB.) hereafter, running together as it were about a
great snake, they will wish to see him; namāny āsām etā́ni nāmagra¬
ham (ŚB.) with separate naming of these their names; yó viparyā́sam
avagū́hati (ŚB.) whoever buries it upside down; bāhūtkṣepaṁ krand¬
itum pravṛttā (Ś.) she proceeded to cry, throwing up her arms (with armtossing'); navacūtapallavāni darśaṁ-darśam madhukarāṇāṁ kva¬
nitāni śrāvaṁ-śrāvam paribabhrāma (DKC.) he wandered about,
constantly seeing the young shoots of the mango, and hearing the humming of
the bees. Repeated forms, like those in the last example, are approved in
the later language; they do not occur earlier (but instead of them the repeated ordinary gerund: 994h).
CHAPTE R XIV .
996. SECONDARY conjugations are those in which a
whole system of forms, like that already described as made
from the simple root, is made, with greater or less completeness, from a derivative conjugation-stem; and is also
DERIVATIV E O R SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION .
361 PASSIVE . [—998
usually connected with a certain definite modification of
the original radical sense.
a. We have seen, indeed, that the tense-systems are also for the most
part made from derivative-stems; and even that, in some cases, such stems
assume the appearance and value of roots, and are made the basis of a
complete conjugational system. Nor is there any distinct division-line to
be drawn between tense-systems and derivative conjugations; the latter are
present-systems which have been expanded into conjugations by the addition
of other tenses, and of participles, infinitives, and so on. In the earliest
language, their forms outside of the present-system are still quite rare,
hardly more than sporadic; and even later they are — with the exception
of one or two formations which attain a comparative frequency — much
less common than the corresponding forms of primary conjugation.
997. The secondary conjugations are: I. Passive;
II. Intensive; III. Desiderative ; IV. Causative; V. Denominative.
a. The passive is classed here as a secondary conjugation because of
its analogy with the others in respect to specific value, and freedom of
formation, although it does not, like them, make its forms outside the
present system from its present-stem.
I. Passive.
998. The passive conjugation has been already in the
main described. Thus, we have seen that —
a. It has a special present-system, the stem of which
is present only, and not made the basis of any of the remaining forms: this stem is formed with the accented classsign U ya, and it takes (with exceptions: 774) the middle
endings. This present-system is treated with the others,
above, 768 ff.
b. There is a special passive 3d sing, of the aorist,
ending in ^ i : it is treated above, 842 ff.
e. In the remaining tenses, the middle forms are used
also in a passive sense.
d. But the passive use of middle forms is not common; it is oftenest
met with in the perfect. The participle to a great extent takes the place
of a past passive tense, and the gerundive that of a future. On the other
998—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 3 6 2
hand, in the oldest language (RV.), middle forms of other present-systems
are in a considerable number of cases employed with passive meaning.
e. According to the grammarians, there may be formed from some
verbs, for passive use, a special stem for the aorist and the two future
systems, coinciding in form with the peculiar 3d sing, aorist,
f. Thus, from √dā (aor. 3d sing, adāyi), beside ádāsi, dāsyé,
dātā́he, also ádāyiṣi, dāyiṣyé, dāyitā́he. The permission to make this
double formation extends to all roots ending in vowels, and to grah, dṛś,
and nan. No such passive forms occur in the older language, and not halfa-dozen are quotable from the later (we find adhāyiṣi and asthāyiṣi in
DKC, and anāyiṣata in Kuval.),
g. As to the alleged passive inflection of the periphrastic perfect, see
below, 1072.
h. Besides the participle from the present tense-stem
(771. 5), the passive has a past participle in rT ta (952), or
*f na (957), and future participles, or gerundives, of various
formation (961 ff), made directly from the root.
999. As already pointed out (282 a), the language, especially
later, has a decided predilection for the passive form of the sentence.
This is given in part by the use of finite passive forms, but oftener
by that of the passive participle and of the gerundive: the participle
being taken in part in a present sense, but more usually in a past
(whether indefinite or proximate past), and sometimes with a copula
expressed, but much oftener without it; and the gerundive representing either a pure future or one with the sense of necessity or
duty added. A further example is: tatrāi 'ko yuvā brāhmaṇo
dṛṣṭaḥ: taṁ dṛṣṭvā kāmena pīḍitā saṁjātā: sakhyā agre kathi¬
tam: sakhi puruṣo 'yaṁ gṛhītvā mama mātuh samīpam aneta¬
vyaḥ (Yet.) there she saw a young Brahman; at sight of him she felt
the pangs of love; she said to her friend: 'friend, you must take and
bring this man to my mother1
. In some styles of later Sanskrit, the
prevailing expression of past time is by means of the passive participle (thus, in Yet., an extreme case, more than nine tenths).
a. As in other languages, a 3d sing, passive is freely made from
intransitive as well as transitive verbs: thus, ihā "gamyatām come hither;
tvayā tatrāi 'va sthīyatām do you stand just there; sarvāir jālam
ādāyo 'ḍḍīyatām (H.) let all fly up with the net.
II. Intensive.
1000. The intensive (sometimes also called frequentative) is that one of the secondary conjugations which is
least removed from the analogy of formations already de-
363 INTENSIVE. [—1002
scribed. It is, like the present-system of the second conjugation-class (642 ff), the inflection of a reduplicated stem,
but of one that is peculiar in having a strengthened reduplication. It is decidedly less extended beyond the limits
of a present-system than any other of the derivative conjugations.
a. The intensive conjugation signifies the repetition or
the intensification of the action expressed by the primary
conjugation of a root.
1001 . According to the grammarians, the intensive
conjugation may be formed from nearly all the roots in the
language — the exceptions being roots of more than one
syllable, those conjugated only causatively (below, 1056),
and in general those beginning with a vowel.
a. In fact, however, intensives in the later language are very rare,
so rare that it is hard to tell precisely what value is to be given to the
rules of the native grammar respecting them. Nor are they at all common
earlier, except (comparatively) in the RV. ‚ which contains about six sevenths
of the whole number (rather over a hundred) quotable from Veda and Brāh¬
maṇa and Sūtra-texts; AV. has less than half as many as RV., and many
of them in RV. passages; from the later language are quotable about twenty
of these, and about forty more, but for the most part only in an occurrence
or two.
b. Hence, in the- description to be given below, the actual aspect of
the formation, as exhibited in the older language, will be had primarily
and especially in view; and the examples will be of forms found there
in use.
1002 . The strong intensive reduplication is made in
three different ways:
I. a. The reduplicating syllable is, as elsewhere, composed of
a single consonant with following vowel, and, so far as the consonant is concerned, follows the rules for present and perfect reduplication (590); but the vowel is a heavy one, radical a and ṛ (or ar)
being reduplicated with ā‚ an i-vowel by e, and an u-vowel by o.
Examples are: vāvad, bābadh, śāśvas, rārandh; dādṛ, dādhṛ;
cekit, tetij, nenī, vevlī; śośuc, popruth, coṣku, johū.
I I. b. The reduplicating syllable has a final consonant, taken
from the end of the root. With an exception or two, this consonant
is either r (or its substitute 1) or a nasal.
1002—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 3 6 4
Examples are: carcar, caleal, sarsṛ, marmṛj, jarhṛṣ; caṅkram,
jaṅghan, taṃstan, dandaś (√daṃś or daś), jañjabh (√jambh or jabh),
tantas (√taṃs or tas), nannam (√nam), yaṁyam (√yam). The
nasal is assimilated to the initial consonant.
c. Only roots having a or ṛ as vowel make this form of reduplication,
but with such roots it is more common than either of the other forms.
d. Irregular formations of this class are: with a final other than r
or n in the reduplication, badbadti; with a final nasal in the reduplication which is not found in the root, jaṅgah (RV,), jañjap (ŚB,; and
jaṅgūyat PB, is perhaps from √gu; the later language has further
dandah); with an anomalous initial consonant in reduplication, jarbhur
from √bhur (compare the Vedic perfect jabhāra from √bhṛ, 789 b),
galgal from √gal; with various treatment of an ṛ or ar-element, dardar
and dardir, carkar and carkir, tartar and tartur, carcar and car¬
cur, jargur and jalgul.
e. The roots i and ṛ are the only ones with vowel initial forming an
intensive stem: i makes iyāy (? PU,, once); ṛ makes the irregular alar
or alṛ. As to the stem ī́ya, see below, 1021b.
III. f. The reduplication is dissyllabic, an i-vowel being added
after a final consonant of the reduplicating syllable. This i-vowel is
in the older language short before a double consonant, and long before a single.
Examples are: ganīgam (but gánigmatam), varīvṛt‚_ vanīvāh,
caniṣkad, saniṣvan; navīnu, davidyut (and the participles dávidhvat
but távītuat). A single exception as to the quantity of the i is davi¬
dhāva.
g. This method of reduplication is followed in the older language
by about thirty roots. Thus, of roots having final or penultimate n (once
m), and n in the reduplicating syllable, pan, phan, san, svan, han;
gam; krand, ścand, skand, syand; of roots having final or medial ṛ,
and r in the reduplicating syllable, kṛ make, tṛ, bhṛ, vṛ, mṛj, mṛś,
vṛj, vṛt, sṛp; also mluc (malimluc); — further, of roots assuming in
the reduplication a n not found in the root, only van (ŚB.: the grammarians allow also kas, pat, pad; and panīpad is quotable later; and ACS.
has canīkhudat, for which TB. reads kánīkhunat); finally, of Toots
having u or ū as radical vowel, with av before the i-vowel, tu, dhū,
nu, dyut.
h. In this class, the general rules as to the form of the reduplicating
consonant (590) are violated in the case of ghanīghan and bharībhṛ,
and of ganīgam, karīkṛ (but the regular carīkṛ also occurs), kani¬
krand, and kaniṣkand (but also caniṣkand occurs); also in kanīkhun.
i. The reversion to more original guttural form after the reduplication
in cekit, and jaṅghan and ghanīghan, is in accordance with what takes
place elsewhere (2161).
365 INTENSIVE. [—1006
1003. The same root is allowed to form its intensive stem in
more than one way.
Thus, in the older language, dādṛ and dardṛ; dādhṛ and dardhṛ;
cācal and carcar (and carcur); tartar (and tartur) and tarītṛ;
jaṅgam and ganīgam; jaṅghan and ghanīghan; pamphan and
panīphan; marmṛj and marīmṛj; marmṛś and marīmṛś; varvṛt
and varīvṛt; jarbhṛ and bharībhṛ; dodhū and davīdhū; nonu and
navīnu; bābadh and badbadh.
1004. The model of normal intensive inflection is the
present-system of the reduplicating conjugation-class (842 ff.);
and this is indeed to a considerable extent followed, in
respect to endings, strengthening of stem, and accent. But
deviations from the model are not rare; and the forms are
in general of too infrequent occurrence to allow of satisfactory classification and explanation.
a. The most marked irregularity is the frequent insertion of an
ī between the stem and ending. According to the grammarians,
this is allowed in all the strong forms before an ending beginning
with a consonant; and before the ī a final vowel has guṇa-strengthen¬
ing, but a medial one remains unchanged.
Present-System.
1005. We will take up the parts of the present-system in their
order, giving first what is recognized as regular in the laterlanguage,
and then showing how the formation appears in the earlier texts. As
most grammarians do not allow a middle inflection, and middle forms
are few even in the Veda, no attempt will be made to set up a paradigm for the middle voice.
1006. As example of inflection may be taken the root
í%^" vid know, of which the intensive stem is ofJc^ vevid,
or, in strong forms, -t-T" véved.
a. Neither from this noT from any other root*are more than a few scattering forms actually quotable.
1. Present Indicative,
s. d. p.
vévedmi, vévidīmi vevidvás vevidmás
1006—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 366
2 ^ffH , ^N(ÌÍ M ^ÖdíH^ %R~ T
vévetsi, vévidīṣi vevitthás vevitthá
3 WcT, ^fa(ìíd %f%īīīī ^[fcT
vévetti, vévidīti vevittás vévidati
b. From √~T hū, the singular forms with auxiliary
vowel would be īīt^tfīī jóhavīmi, xī)c^ej)ÍM jóhavīṣi, sTì^cjìícl
jóhavīti.
1007. a. The forms found in the older language agree in general
with the paradigm. Examples are: 1st sing., carkarmi, veveṣmi; 2d
sing., alarṣi, dárdarṣi; 3d sing., álarti, dādharti, veveti, nenekti,
jaṅghanti, kánikrantti, ganīgaṁti; 3d du., jarbhṛtás; 1st pl., nonu¬
mas; 2d pl., jāgratha; 3d pl., dādhrati, nānadati, bharibhrati,
várvṛtatí, dávidyutati, nénijati, and, irregularly, veviṣanti; and, with
the auxiliary vowel, jóhavīmi, cākaśīmi; cā́kaśīti, nónavīti, darda¬
rīti, jarbhurīti. No stem with dissyllabic reduplication takes the auxiliary ī in any of its forms.
b. A single dual form with ī and strong stem occurs: namely, tar¬
tarīthas.
c. The middle forms found to occur are: 1st sing., jóguve, nenije;
3d sing., nenikté, sarsṛte; and, with irregular accent, tétikte, dédiṣṭe;
with irregular loss of final radical nasal, nánnate; with ending e instead
of te, cékite, jáùgahe, jóguve, yoyuve, bābadhe, and (with irregular
accent) badbadhé; 3d du., sarsrāte; 3d pl., dedicate.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1008. a. Subjunctive forms with primary endings are extremely rare:
there have been noticed only jaṅghánāni, jāgarāsi (AV.); and, in the
middle, tantasāíte (3d du.),
b. Forms with secondary endings are more frequent: thus, 2d sing.,
jaṅghanas, jalgulas; 3d sing., jāgarat, cékitat, bobhavat, cárkṛṣat,
jáṅghanat, bárbṛhat, mármṛjat, mármṛśat, parpharat, dardirat,
caniṣkadat, davidyutat, saniṣvaṇat; 1st du., jaṅghanāva; 1st pl.,
carkirāma, vevidāma; 3d pl., pā́patan, śóśucan, carkiran; and,
with double mode-sign, cā́kaśān (AV.). Of [the middle are found only
3d persons plural: thus, jáṅghananta, jarhṛṣanta, marmṛjanta, nonu¬
vanta, śośucanta.
3. Present Optative.
1009. This mode would show the unstrengthened stem,
with the usual endings (566), accented. Thus:
367 INTENSIVE. [—1012
s. d. p.
i 3Í-^IH^ ^ksm ^N^I H
vevidyā́m vevidyā́va vevidyā́ma
etc. etc. etc.
a. The optative is represented by only an example or two in the older
language]: thus, active, veviṣyāt (AV.), jāgṛyās (KB.), jāgriyāt (AB.),
jāgṛ́yāma (VS. MS.; but jāgriyāma TS.); RV. has only cākanyāt (pft.?);
middle, nenijīta (K.).
4. Present Imperative.
1010. The regular forms of the imperative, including
the usual subjunctive first persons, would be as follows:
s. d. p.
vévidāni
2
zmx
veviddhí
3 ^īī, 5í^{ìd
vévidāva
–s
vevittám
3&<IH
vévidāma
vevittá
vévettu, vévidītu vevittam vévidatu
1011. a. Older imperative forms are less rare than optative. The
first persons have been given above Qānghánāni, the only accented example, does not correspond with the model, but is in conformity with the
subjunctive of the reduplicating present); the proper imperatives are: 2d
sing., dādṛhí, dardṛhi, carkṛdhi, jāgṛhi, nenigdhi, rāranddhí; the
endiug tat is found in carkṛtāt and jāgṛtāt; and the latter (as was
pointed out above, 571b) is used in A V. as first person sing.; barbṛhi
shows an elsewhere unparalleled loss of h before the ending hi; 3d sing.,
dādhartu, veveṣṭu, dardartu, marmarttu; 2d du., jāgṛtam; 3d du.,
jāgṛtām; 2d pl., jāgṛtá; caṅkramata (RV., once) has an anomalous
union-vowel. In the middle voice is found only neniksva (ŚB.),
b. Of imperative forms with auxiliary Ī, RV. has none; AV. has
vāvadītu and johavītu, and such are sometimes found in the Brāhmaṇas;
A V. has also, against rule, toṃstanīhi and jaṅghanīhi; VS. has cākaśīhi.
5. Present Participle.
1012. The intensive participles, both active and middle,
are comparatively common in the older language. They are
formed and inflected like those of the reduplicating present,
and have the accent on the reduplicating syllable.
1012—] XIV . SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION . 3 6 8
Examples are: active, cā́kaśat, nā́nadat, cékitat, mémyat, śóśu¬
cat, róruvat, dàrdrat, mármṛjat, jáṅghanat, nánnamat, pánī¬
phanat, kánikradat, dávidyutat; — middle, bā́badhāna, mémyāna,
cékitāna, yóyuvāna, rórucāna, járbhurāṇa, sársrāṇa, jañjabhāna,
nánnamāna, dándaśāna. No middle participle shows the dissyllabic
reduplication.
1013. a. On account of their accent, rārahāṇá, rārakṣāṇá, and
jāhṛṣāṇá (beside járhṛṣāṇa) are probably to be regarded as perfect participles, although no other perfect forms with heavy reduplication from the
same roots occur. The inference is, however, rendered uncertain by the
unmistakably intensive badbadhāná and marmṛjāná (beside mármṛj¬
āna). As to śū́śucāna etc., see 806 a.
b. The RV. has once jáṅghnatas, gen. sing., with root-vowel cast
out; kánikrat appears to be used once for kánikradat; if cākát is to
be referred to √kā (Grassmann), it is the only example of an intensive
from a root in ā, and its accent is anomalous. Marmṛśantas (AB.) is
perhaps a false reading; but forms with the nasal irregularly retained are
found repeatedly in the epics and later: thus, lelihan, dedīpyantīm
(MBh.), jājvalant (MBh. R,), sarīsṛpantāu (BhP.), rāraṭantī (R.).
6. Imperfect.
1014. The imperfect is regularly inflected as follows:
s.
ávevidam
2 M^rìtU *Hfe4l^
ávevet, ávevidīs
3 *M3H, ^|^{ìri ^
ávevet, ávevidīt
d.
ávevidva
ávevittam
ávevittām
P–
ávevidma
ávevitta
ávevidus
1015. The imperfect forms found in the earlier texts are not numerous. They are, including those from which the augment is omitted, as
follows: in active, 1st sing., acākaśam, dediśam; 2d sing., ajāgar,
adardar, dardar; 3d sing., adardar, adardhar, avarīvar, dardar,
kániṣkan, dávidyot, návīnot; 2d du., adardṛtam; 1st pl., marmṛjmá;
3d pl., anannamus, adardirus, acarkṛṣus, ájohavus, anonavus;
and, with auxiliary ī, in 3d sing., avāvacīt, ávāvaśīt, ávāvarīt,
áyoyavīt, ároravīt, ájohavīt; and, irregularly, in 3d du., avāvaśītām.
The middle forms are extremely few: namely, 3d sing. ‚ ádediṣṭa, ánan–
nata (with loss of the final radical in a weak form of root); 3d pl.
marmṛjata, and avāvaśanta (which, if it belongs here, shows a transfer
to an a-stem).
369 INTENSIVE . [—1017
1016. Derivative Middl e Inflection. From every
intensive stem, as above described, may be formed in the
present-system a further derivative conjugation which is
formally identical with a passive, being made by the accented
sign U ya, along with middle endings only. It has not,
however, a passive value, but is in meaning and use indistinguishable from the simpler conjugation.
a. A final vowel before this ya is treated as before the passivesign ya \770;.
b. The inflection is precisely like that of any other stem ending
in a in the middle voice: thus, from √mṛj, intensive stem marmṛj,
is made the present indicative marmṛjyé, marmṛjyáse, marmṛjyáte,
etc.; optative marmṛjyéya, marmṛjyéthās, marmṛjyéta, etc.; imperative marmṛjyásva, marmṛjyátām, etc.; participle marmṛjyá¬
māna; imperfect ámarmṛjye, ámarmṛjyathās, ámarmṛjyata, etc.;
subjunctive forms do not occur.
c. In a very few sporadic cases, these yá-forms are given a passive
value: thus, jaṅghanyamāna in MḍU.; bambhramyate, dādhmā¬
yamāna, pepīyamāna in the later language. And active participles
(529a) are not unknown: thus, dedīpyantīm (MBh.), dodhūyant
(MBh. BhP.).
1017. This kind of intensive inflection is more common
than the other in the later language; in the earlier, it is
comparatively rare.
a. In RV., yá-forms are made from eight roots, five of which have
also forms of the simpler conjugation; the AV. adds one more; the other
earlier texts (so far as observed) about twenty more, and half of them have
likewise forms of the simpler conjugation. Thus: from √mṛj, marmṛj¬
yáte etc., and marīmṛjyeta; from √tṛ, tartūryante; from √car,
carcūryámāṇa; from √nī, nenīyéran, etc.; from √vī, vevīyate; from
√rih, rerihyáte etc.; from vij, vevijyáte; from √sku, coṣkūyáse etc.;
from √diś, dediśyate; from √kāś, cākaśyáte etc.; from √vad,
vāvadyámāna; from √nam, nannamyadhvam; from √vah, vanīvāh¬
yéta etc. (with lengthened root-vowel, elsewhere unknown); from √krand,
kanikradyámāna; from √vṛt, varīvartyámāna (ŚB.: should be
varīvṛty-); from √mṛ́ś, amarīmṛśyanta (ŚB. ? the text reads amarīmṛt¬
syanta); from √yup, yoyupyánte etc.; from √nud, anonudyanta;
from √vlī, avevlīyanta; from √jabh, jañjabhyáte etc.; from* j/jap,
jañjapyámāna; and so on.
1018—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 370
Perfect.
1018. The grammarians are at variance as to whether
a perfect may be formed directly from the intensive stem,
or whether only a periphrastic perfect (below, 1070 ff.) is
to be admitted.
a* No example of an intensive periphrastic perfect has anywhere
come to light (except from jāgṛ: 1020 a), A few unmistakable perfect
forms are made from the intensively reduplicated root in RV.: namely,
davidhāva and nónāva, 3d sing,, and nonuvus, 3d pl.; and there
occur further dodrāva (TS.), yoyāva and lelā́ya (MS.), and leláya
(? ŚB.), all used in the sense of presents. To them may be added jā¬
gara 1st sing, and jāgā́ra 3d sing.: but as to these, see below, 1020a.
Aorist, Future, etc.
1019. As to the remaining parts of a full verbal conjugation, also, the grammarians are not agreed (occurrences
of such forms, apparently, being too rare to afford even
them any basis for rules); in general, it is allowed to treat
the intensive stem further as a root in filling up the scheme
of forms, using always the auxiliary vowel ^ i where it is
ever used in the simple conjugation.
a. Thus, from √vid‚ intensive stem vevid, would be made the
aorist avevidiṣam with precative vevidyāsam, the futures vevid¬
iṣyāmi and veviditāsmi, the participles vevidita, veviditavya, etc,
the infinitive veviditum, and the gerunds veviditvā and -vevidya.
And, where the intensive conjugation is the derivative middle one,
the aorist and futures would take the corresponding middle form.
b. Of all this, in the ancient language, there is hardly a trace. The
RV. has cárkṛṣe, 3d sing, mid., of a formation like hiṣe and stuṣé
(894 d), and the gerundives vitantasā́yya, and marmṛjénya and vāvṛ¬
dhénya; and ŚB. has the participle vanīvāhitá, and the infinitive dédīyi¬
tavāí. As to jāgariṣyánt and jāgaritá, see the next paragraph.
1020. There are systems of inflection of certain roots, the intensive character of which is questioned or questionable. Thus:
a. The root gṛ (or gar) wake has from the first no present-system
save one with intensive reduplication; and its intensive stem, jāgṛ, begins
early to assume the value of a root, and form a completer conjugation;
while by the grammarians this stem is reckoned as if simple and belonging to the root-class, and is inflected throughout accordingly. Those of
its forms which occur in the older language have been given along with
371 INTENSIVE. [—1024
the other intensives above. They are, for the present-system, the same
with those acknowledged as Tegular later. The older perfect is like the
other intensive perfects found in RV.: namely, jāgara etc., with the
participle jāgṛvā́ṃs; and a future jāgariṣyá-, a passive participle jāgaritá,
and a gerundive jāgaritavyà, are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. The old aorist
(RV.) is the usualreduplicated orso-called causative aorist: thus, ájīgar. The
grammarians give it in the later language a perfect with additional reduplication, jajāgāra etc., an iṣ-aorist, ajāgariṣam, with precative jāgaryāsam,
and everything else that is needed to make up a complete conjugation.
The perf. jajāgāra is quotable from the epics and later, as also the periphrastic jāgarām āsa. And MBh. has the mutilated jāgṛmi, and also
a-forms, as jāgarati and jāgramāṇa.
1021. a. The stem irajya (active only) regulate, from which a
number of forms are made in RV., has been viewed as an intensive from
√raj or ṛj. It lacks, however, any analogy with the intensive formation.
The same is true of iradh propitiate (only iradhanta and irádhyāi,
apparently for iradhadhyāi).
b. The middle stem ī́ya, not infrequent in the oldest language, is
often called an intensive of √i go, but without any propriety, as it has no
analogy of form whatever with an intensive. The isolated 1st pl. īmahe,
common in RV., is of questionable character.
1022. The root lī totter, with constant intensive reduplication, lelī,
is quite irregular in inflection and accent: thus, pres., lelā́yati and lelā¬
yate, pples lelāyántī and leláyatas (gen. sing.) and lelāyamāna, impf,
alelāyat and alelet and alelīyata, perf. lelāya and leláya (?).
1023. The RV. anomalous form dart (or dard), 2d and 3d sing,
from √dṛ or dar, is doubtfully referred to the intensive, as if abbreviated
from dardar. RV. has once avarīvus (or -vur) where the sense requires
a form from √vṛt‚ as avarīvṛtus. The form rarāṇátā (RV., once)
seems corrupt
1024. A marked intensive or frequentative meaning is not always easily to be traced in the forms classed as intensive; and in
some of them it is quite effaced. Thus, the roots cit‚ nij, viṣ use
their intensive present-system as if it were an ordinary conjugationclass; nor is it otherwise with gṛ (jāgṛ). The grammarians reckon
the inflection of nij and viṣ as belonging to the reduplicating present-system, with irregularly strengthened reduplication; and they
treat in the same way vie and vij; jāgṛ, as we have seen, they
account a simple root.
a. Also daridrā, intensive of √drā run, is made by the grammarians
a simple root, and furnished with a complete set of conjugational forms:
as dadaridrāu; adaridrāsīt, etc. etc. It does not occur in the older
language (unless dáridrat TS., for which VS. MS. read dáridra). The
so-called root vevī gutter is a pure intensive.
1025—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 372
1025. It is allowed by the grammarians to make from the intensive
stem also a passive, desiderative, causative, and so on: thus, from vevid,
pass, vevidyé; desid. vévidiṣāmi; caus. vevidáyāmi; desid. of causative, vévidayiṣāmi. But such formations are excessively rare; quotable
are varīvarjáyantī AV., jāgaráyant TB. etc.; dādhārayati JB.,
dandaśayitvā DKC.
III. Desiderative.
1026. By the desiderative conjugation is signified a desire for the action or condition denoted by the simple root:
thus, ÍM-4IĪH píbāmi I drink, desid.faqTC-íīīīīpípāsāmi I wish
to drink; sfWlJn jívāmi I live, desid. í^ìícJNlÍH jíjīviṣāmi
I desire to live. Such a conjugation is allowed to be formed
from any simple root in the language, and also from any
causative stem.
a. The desiderative conjugation, although its forms outside the
present-system are extremely rare in the oldest language, is earlier
and more fully expanded into a whole verbal system than the intensive. Its forms are also of increasing frequency: much fewer than
the intensives in RV., more numerous in the Brāhmaṇas and later;
not one third of the whole number of roots (about a hundred) noted
as having a desiderative conjugation in Veda and Brāhmaṇa have
such in RV.
1027. The desiderative stem is formed from the simple
root by the addition of two characteristics: 1. a reduplication, which always has the accent; 2. an appended FT sa —
which, however (like the tense-signs of aorist and future),
sometimes takes before it the auxiliary vowel ^ i , becoming
a. A few instances in the concluding part of ŚB. in which the accent is otherwise laid — thus, tiṣṭhā́set, yiyāsántam, vividiṣánti,
īpsántas — must probably be regarded as errors.
1028. The root in general remains unchanged; but
with the following exceptions:
a. A final i or u is lengthened before sa: thus, cikṣīṣa, cikīṣa,
jigīṣa; śuśrūṣa, juhūṣa, cukṣūṣa.
b. A final ṛ becomes īr or ūr before sa: thus, cikīrṣa, titīrṣa
lalso irregularly tūtūrṣa RV.), didhīrṣa, sisīrṣa, tistīrṣa (also tu¬
stūrṣa), jihīrṣa; bubhūrṣa, mumūrṣa (the only examples quotable).
373 DESIDERATIVE . [—1029
c. Before iṣa, a final i- or u- or ṛ-vowel necessarily, and a
penultimate i or u or ṛ optionally, have the guṇa-strengthening; no
examples are quotable from the older texts; later occur śiśayiṣa,
śiśariṣa; cikartiṣa, ninartiṣa, mimardiṣa, vivarṣiṣa, śuśobhiṣa;
but rurudiṣa.
More special exceptions are:
d. A few roots in ā weaken this vowel to ī or even i : thus, jigīṣa
from √gā go; pipīṣa (beside pipāsa) from √pā drink, jihīṣa (AV.)
from √hā remove (jihīte: 664); didhiṣa (beside dhitsa) from √dhā.
e. A few roots in an or am lengthen the vowel: thus, jigāṃsa
(beside jigamiṣa) from √gam; jighāṃsa from √han; mīmāṃsa from
√man; and titāṃsa from √tan.
f. Reversion to guttural form of an initial after the reduplication is
seen in cikīṣa from √ci, cikitsa from √cit, jigīṣa from √ji, jighāṃsa
from √han; and √hi is said to make jighīṣa (no occurrence).
g. The roots van and san make vivāsa and siṣāsa, from the rootforms vā and sā.
h. The root jīv forms jujyūṣa (ŚB.: jijīviṣa, VS.); and the other
roots in īv (765) are required to make the same change before sa, and to
have guṇa before iṣa: thus, susyūṣa or siseviṣa from √sīv. Svap
forms suṣupsa. Dhūrv forms dudhūrṣa.
i‚ Initial s is usually left unchanged to s after the reduplication
when the desiderative sign has ṣ (184e): thus, sisaṅkṣa (ŚB.: √sañj),
and susyūṣa and sisaniṣa, according to the grammarians; but tuṣṭūṣa
is met with.
j . Further may be mentioned as prescribed by the grammarians:
ninaṅkṣa (or ninaśiṣa) from √naś be lost; mimaṅkṣa from √majj
(occurs in mimaṅkṣu); mimārjiṣa (or mimṛkṣa) from √mṛj.
1029. The consonant of the reduplication follows the
general rules (590); the vowel is ^ i if the root has an avowel, or ^ ṛ, or an i-vowel; it is 3 u if the root has an
u-vowel. But:
a. A few roots have a long vowel in the reduplicating syllable: thus,
bībhatsa from √badh or bādh; mīmāṃsa from √man; and tūtūrṣa (RV.)
from √tur; dadhiṣu (AV.) and dadaṅkṣu (C.) are probably false forms.
b. From √aś is made (ŚB.) aśiśiṣa, and from √edh (VS.)
edidhiṣa (with a mode of reduplication like that followed sometimes in
the reduplicating aorist: 862). In the older language, these are the only
roots with initial vowel which form a desiderative stem, except āp and
ṛdh‚ which have abbreviated stems: see the next paragraph. In the later
language occur further eṣiṣiṣa (√iṣ seek) and īcikṣiṣa (√īkṣ); and the
grammarians add others, as arjihiṣa (√arh), undidiṣa (√und), ardi¬
dhiṣa (√ṛdh).
1029—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 374
c. RV. has the stems ínakṣa and íyakṣa, regarded as desideratives
from √√naś attain and yaj, with mutilated reduplication.
1030. A number of roots, including some of very common use, form an abbreviated stem apparently by a contraction of reduplication and root together into one syllable:
thus, īpsa from >~tf āp; "^cH ditsa from √^T dā.
a. Such abbreviated stems are found in the older language as follows:
dhitsa (beside didhiṣa) from √dhā; ditsa (beside didasa) from √dā;
dipsa (dhīpsa JB. ) from √dabh; śikṣa from √śak; sīkṣa from √sah:
these are found in RV.; in AV. are added īpsa from √āp (RV. has apsa
once), and īrtsa from √ṛdh; the other texts furnish lipsa (ŚB.) or
līpsa (TB.) from √labh, ripsa (GB.) from √rabh, pitsa (ŚB.) from
√pad, and dhīkṣa (ŚB.) from √doh (not √dih, since no roots with i as
medial vowel show the contracted form). In the later language are further
found pitsa from √pat also, jñīpsa from the causative quasi-root jñap
(below, 1042j), and the anomalous mitsa from √mā measure (allowed
also from roots mi and mī); and the grammarians give ritsa from √rādh.
Also mokṣa is (very questionably) viewed as a desiderative stem from
√muc.
1031. The use of the auxiliary vowel ^ i is quite rare
in the early language, but more common later; and it is
allowed or prescribed by the grammarians in many stems
which have not been found in actual use.
a. It is declared to follow in general, though not without exceptions, necessary or optional, the analogy of the futures (934,
943 a).
b. No example of the use of i is found in RV., and only one each in
AV. (pipatiṣa), VS. (jijīviṣa), and TS. (jigamiṣa). The other examples
noted in the early texts are aśiśiṣa, cikramiṣa, jigrahīṣa (with ī fori,
as elsewhere in this root), cicariṣa, edidhiṣa, jijaniṣa, didīkṣiṣa,
bibādhiṣa, ruruciṣa, vivadiṣa, vividiṣa, śiśāsiṣa, tiṣṭighiṣa, jihiṃ¬
siṣa: most of them are found only in ŚB. Stems also without the auxiliary vowel are made from roots gam, grah, car, jīv, pat, bādh, vid.
1032. Inflection: Present-System. The desiderative stem is conjugated in the present-system with perfect regularity, like other a-stems (733 a), in both voices, in
all the modes (including, in the older language, the subjunctive), and with participles and imperfect. It will be
sufficient to give here the first persons only. We may take
375 DESIDERATIVE. [—1032
as active model ^cś-f īpsa seek to obtain, from √-Snīī^āp obtain;
as middle, feilet titikṣa endure, from √ÍHīī^ tij be sharp (see
below, 1040).
1. Present Indicative.
active. middle,
s. d. p. s. d. p.
i fcīīTfa (LHMH^ (^IH ^ 1rriīī^ ídÍHdM^ ídtrl-HIH-fe
ī́psāmi ī́psāvas ī́psāmas títikṣe títikṣāvahe títikṣāmahe
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1 ^Fiīft ipm frlícli ÍHÍHdN^ ÌHÍHdlH*
ī́psāni ī́psāva ī́psāma títikṣāi títikṣāvahāi títikṣāmahāi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
3. Present Optative.
ī́pseyam ī́pseva ī́psema títikṣeya títikṣevahi títikṣemahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
4. Present Imperative.
2
f-qrlīī ^-.HrT ídírl"dH fdíd^lH^ fMcT5T^
ī́psa ī́psatam ī́psata títikṣasva títikṣethām títikṣadhvam
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
5. Present Participle.
^īīt ^ ī́psant (f. ^mríì ī́psantī) íriícl^Hlui títikṣamāṇa
6. Imperfect.
āípsam āípsāva āípsāma átitikṣe átitikṣāvahi átitikṣāmahi
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
a. There are almost no irregularities of inflection to be reported from
the older language. No 1st pl. in masi, or 2d pl. in thana or tana, is
met with; of the impv. in tat, only īpsatāt. The quotable subjunctive
forms are those in sāni, sāt and sat, San, and santa. KBU. has jijñāsīta
(cf. 738b). But the fem. pple síṣāsatī (instead of siṣāsantī) occurs
once or twice in the older texts; and RV. has dídhiṣāṇa.
b. In the epics and later are found sporadic forms of the non-a-
1032—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 376
conjugation: thus, sisṛkṣmas (BhP.), titikṣmahe and bubhūṣate 3d
pl. (MBh.); and the fem. participles lipsatī and cikīrṣatī (MBh.: against
449b). The anomalous jighāṃsīyāt occurs also in MBh. and Vas.
1033. a. Desiderative forms outside the present-system are
extremely rare in the oldest language. The RV. has only perfect
forms from a stem mimikṣ — thus, mimikṣáthus, mimikṣátus,
mimikṣús; mimikṣe, mimikṣire — along with the present forms
mimikṣati, mimikṣa etc., mimikṣant (pple): they show thatmimikṣ
or mikṣ has taken on the character of an independent root. In AV.
are found two aorist forms, īrtsīs and acikitsīs, and a participle or two
from mīmāṃsa (see below, 1037 a, 1039 a) — all of them from stems
which have lost their distinct desiderative meaning, and come to bear
an independent value. The forms noted from the other earlier texts
will be given in full below.
b. In the later language, a complete system of verbal
forms is allowed to be made in the desiderative conjugation,
the desiderative stem, less its final vowel, being treated as
a root. Thus:
1034. Perfect. The desiderative perfect is the periphrastic (1070 ff).
a. Thus, īpsāṁ cakāra etc ; titikṣāṁ cakre etc Such forms
are made in ŚB, from √√kram, dhūrv, bādh, ruh; and in ChU,
from man.
b. Apparent perfect forms of the ordinary kind made from mimikṣ
in RV. have been noticed in the preceding paragraph. And AB. (viii. 21.
10) has once didāsitha thou hast desired to give.
1035. Aorist. The aorist is of the iṣ-form: thus,
^JLHNH^āípsiṣam, -yÍHÍdí^fa atitikṣiṣi.
a. The AV. has acikitsīs, and īrtsīs (augmentless, with mā́ prohibitive: 579). TB. has āipsīt; ŚB. āírtsīt, ācikīrṣīs and ajighāṃsīs,
and amīmāṃsiṣṭhās; KB. jijñāsiṣi; JUB. āipsiṣma; and AA. adhit¬
siṣam. No examples have been found in the later language.
b. A precative is also allowed— thus, īpsyāsam, titikṣiṣīya; but
it never occurs.
1036. Futures. The futures are made with the auxiliary vowel ^ i : thus, ^fc^īīTÍR īpsiṣyāmi and ^HrlliHH
īpsitāsmi; ÍHÍHÍyi^ titikṣiṣyé and TrlírlRldT% titikṣitāhe.
a. The ŚB‚ has titikṣiṣyate and didṛkṣitā́ras. Such forms as
jijñāsyāmas (MBh.), didhakṣyāmi (R.), and mīmāṃsyant(GGS.) are
doubtless presents, with -sya- blunderingly for -sa-.
377 DESIDERATIVE. [—1039
1037. Verbal Nouns and Adjectives. These too
are made with the auxiliary vowel ^ i , in all cases where
that vowel is ever taken.
a. In the older language have been noted: participle in ta, mīmāṃ¬
sitá (AV., GB.), jijyūṣita (AB.), śuśrūṣitá and dhīkṣitá (ŚB.); —
gerundive in tavya, līpsitavya (AB.), didhyāsitavyà (ŚB,); in ya,
jijñāsyà (ŚB.); — gerund in tvā, mīmāṃsitvā (K.).
1038. Of other declinable stems derived from the desiderative stem,
by far the most common are the adjective in ú — e. g. titikṣu, dipsú,
bībhatsú, siṣāsú (RV. once didṛ́kṣu) — and the abstract noun inā́—
e. g. īpsā, bībhatsā́, mīmāṃsā́, śuśrūṣā — both of which are made
with increasing freedom from an early epoch of the language: especially the
former, which has the value and construction (271a) of a present participle. A few adjectives in enya (having a gerundive character: 966b)
occur in the earlier language: thus, didṛkṣéṇya (RV.), śuśrūṣéṇya (TS.),
ninīṣeṇya (PB.), jijñāsenya (AB.), and, with irregular reduplication
(apparently) papṛkṣéṇya (RV.), dadhiṣeṇya (JB.) ; and didṛkṣéya (RV.)
is a similar formation. RV.has also siṣāsáni and rurukṣám,andsiṣāsátu (?),
In the later language, besides some ofthe formations already instanced (those
in u and ā, and in sya and sitavya), are found a few derivatives in aka,
as cikitsaka, bubhūsaka; in ana, as jijñāsana, didhyāsana; and,
very rarely, in anīya (cikitsanīya) and tṛ (śuśrūṣitṛ); further, secondary derivatives (doubtless) in in from the noun in ā, as īpsin, jigīṣin
(one or two of these occur in the older language). And of an adjective in
a we have an example in bībhatsá (B.S., and later), and perhaps in
avalipsa (AVP.); such words as ajugupsa, duścikitsa, are rather to be
understood as possessive compounds with the noun in ā. As to noun-stems
in is, see 392 d.
1039. Derivative or Tertiary Conjugations. A
passive is allowed to be made, by adding the passive-sign
TJ ya to the desiderative root (orstem without final a): thus,
^FET?T īpsyate it is desired to be obtained; — and a causative, by adding in like manner the causative-sign aya
(1041): thus, (mUlÍH īpsáyāmi I cause to desire obtainment.
a. Of these formations in the older language are found mīmāṃsyá¬
māna (doubtless to be read for -sámāna, AV.), lipsyámāna (ŚB.), and
rurutsyamāna (K.). Half-a-dozen such passives are quotable later, and
one or two causatives: e. g. cikitsyate, vivakṣyate, jijñāsyate; cikīr¬
ṣayant, cikitsayiṣyati.
b. For the desiderative conjugation formed on causative stems,
which is found as early as the Brāhmaṇas, see below, 1052 b.
1040—] XIY. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 378
1040. Some stems which are desiderative in form have lost the
peculiarity of desiderative meaning, and assumed the value of independent roots: examples are cikits cure, jugups despise, titikṣ endure,
bībhats abhor, mīmāṃs ponder, śuśrūṣ obey. Doubtlesssome of the
apparent roots in the language with sibilant final are akin with the
desideratives in origin: e. g. śikṣ, desiderative of śak.
a. On account of the near relation of desiderative and future (cf.
948 b), the former is occasionally found where the latter wasrather to be
expected: thus, rājānam prayiyāsantam (ŚB.) a king about to depart;
prāṇa uccikramiṣan (ChU.) the breath on the point of expiring; mu¬
mūrṣur ivā *bhavat (H.) he was fain to die.
IV. Causative.
1041. a. In the later language is allowed to be made
from most roots a complete causative conjugation. The
basis of this is a causative stem, formed by appending the
causative-sign mT aya to the, usually strengthened, root.
b. But by no means all conjugation-stems formed by
the sign WJ áya are of causative value; and the grammarians
regard a part of them as constituting a conjugation-class,
the tenth or cur-class, according to which roots may be
inflected as according to the other classes, and either alone
or along with others (775).
c. In RV., the proportion without causative value isfully one third.
The formation is a more obviously denominative one than any of the other
conjugation-classes, an intermediate between them and the proper denominatives. A causative meaning has established itself in connection with
the formation, and become predominant, though not exclusive. A number
of roots of late appearance and probably derivative character are included
in the class, and some palpable denominatives, which lack only the usual
denominative accent (below, 1056).
d. The causative formation is of much more frequent use, and more
decidedly expanded into a full conjugation, than either the intensive or the
desiderative. It is made from more than three hundred roots in the early language (in RV., from about one hundred and fifty); but in the oldest, its
forms outside the present-system are (apart from the attached reduplicated
aorist: 1046) exceedingly few.
1042. The treatment of the root before the causativesign CRT aya is as follows:
379 CAUSATIVE. [—1042
a. Medial or initial i, u, ṛ, 1 have theguṇa-strengthening(if
capable of it: 240,; thus, vedaya from √vid, codaya from √cud,
tarpaya from √tṛp; and kalpaya from √klp (only example). but
cintaya, gulphaya, dṛṃhaya.
b. But a few roots lack the strengthening: these are, in the older
language, cit (citaya and cetaya), iṣ, il, riṣ (riṣaya and reṣaya),
vip (vipaya and vepaya), tuj, tur, tuṣ(tuṣaya and toṣaya), dyut
(dyutaya and dyotaya), ruc (rucaya and rocaya), śuc (śucaya and
śocaya), śubh (eubhaya and śobhaya), kṛp, mṛḍ, spṛh ; and grabh
makes in RV. gṛbhaya. Duṣ and guh lengthen the vowel instead. Mṛj
sometimes has vṛddhi, as in other forms: thus, mārjaya (beside mar¬
jaya). On the other hand, guṇa appears irregularly (240 b) in srevaya
(beside śrīvaya), heḍaya, mekṣaya. Similar irregularities in the later
language are giraya, tulaya (also tolaya), churaya (also choraya),
muṣaya, sphuraya. No forms without strengthening have a causative value
made in the older language.
c. A final vowel has the vṛddhi-strengthening: thus, cāyaya,
śāyaya, cyāvaya, bhāvaya, dhāraya, sāraya.
d. But no root in i or ī has vṛddhi in the Veda (unless pāyaya
[k, below] comes from pī rather than pā) — as, indeed, regular causa¬
tives from such roots are hardly quotable: only RV. has k say ay a (beside
kṣepaya) from √kṣi possess; for a few alternatively permitted forms, see
below, I. In B. and S., however, occur śāyaya and sāyaya (√si or
sā); and later -āyaya, cāyaya, smāyaya, ḍāyaya, nāyaya.
e. A few roots have a form also with guṇa-strengthening: thus, cyu,
dru, plu, yu separate, śru, pū, stu, sru; jṛ waste away, dṛ pierce, sṛ,
smṛ, hṛ; vṛ choose makes varaya later (it is not found in V , : epic
also varaya).
f. A medial or initial a in a light syllable is sometimes lengthened, and sometimes remains unchanged: thus, bhājaya, svāpaya,
ādaya ; janaya, śrathaya, anaya (but mandaya, valgaya, bhakṣaya).
g. The roots in the older language which keep their short a are
jan, pan, svan, dhan, ran, stan, gam (gāmaya once in RV.), tam,
dam, raj (usually rañjaya), prath, śrath, śnath, vyath, svad, chad
p íease (also chondaya), nad, dhvas (also dhvaṃsaya), rah, mah
(al&o maṃhaya), nabh (also nambhaya), tvar, svar, hvaI. In the
later language, further, kvaṇ, jvar, trap, day, pan, rac, ran ring,
vadh, val, vaś, ślath, skhal, sthag. Both forms are made (either in
the earlier or in the later language, or in both taken together) by ad‚
kal, kram, kṣam, khan, ghat, cam, cal, jval, tvar, dal, dhvan,
nad, nam, pat, bhram, math, mad, yam, ram, lag, lal, vam, vyadh,
cam be quiet, śram, śvas, svap. The roots which lengthen the vowel
are decidedly the more numerous.
h. If a nasal is taken in any of the strong forms of a root, it usually appears in the causative stem: e. g. dambhaya, daṃśaya, indhaya,
1042—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 380
limpaya, rundhaya, śundhaya, kṛntaya, dṛṃhaya. From a number
of roots, stems both with and without the nasal are made: thus (besides
thosementioned above, g), kuñcaya and kocaya, granthaya and grath¬
aya, bṛṃhaya and barhaya, bhraṃśaya and bhrāśaya, śundhaya
and śodhaya, sañjaya and sajjaya, siñcaya and secaya. In a few of
these is seen the influence of present-stems.
i. Most roots in final ā, and the root ṛ, add p before the conjugation-sign: thus, dāpaya, dhāpaya, sthāpaya; arpaya.
j . Such stems are made in the older language from the roots kṣā,
khyā, gā sing (also gāyaya), glā, ghrā, jñā, dā give, dā divide, drā
run, dhā put and dhā suck, mā measure,mlā,yā, vā blow, sthā, snā,
hā remove; the later language adds kṣmā, dhmā, and hā leave. From
jñā and snā are found in AV. and later the shortened forms jñapaya
and snapaya, and from śrā only śrapaya (not in RV.). Also, in the
later language, glā forms glapaya, and mlā forms mlapaya.
k. Stemsfromā-rootsshowing no p are, earlier, gāyaya (also gāpa¬
ya) from √gā sing, chāyaya, pāyaya from √pā drink (or pī), pyāy¬
aya from √pyā or pyāy; sāyaya from √sā (or si); also, later, hvāy¬
aya from √hvā (or hū); — and further, from roots vā weave, vyā,
and śā (or śi), according to the grammarians.
I. The same p is taken also by a few i- and ī-roots, with other
accompanying irregularities: thus, in the older language, kṣepaya (RV.,
beside kṣayaya) from √kṣi possess; jāpaya (VS. and later) from √ji;
lāpaya (TB. and later; later also lāyaya) from √lī cling; śrāpaya (VS.,
once) from √śri; adhyāpaya (S. and later) from adhi+√i; — in the
later, kṣapaya (beside kṣayaya) from √kṣi destroy; māpaya from
√mī; smāpaya (beside smāyaya) from √smi; hrepaya from √hrī;
— and the grammarians make further krāpaya from √krī; cāpaya (beside
cāyaya) from √ci gather; bhāpaya (beside bhāyaya and bhīṣaya)
from √bhī; repaya from √rī, and vlepaya from √vlī. Moreover, √ruh
makes ropaya (B. and later) beside rohaya (V. and later), and √knū
makes knopaya (late).
m. More anomalous cases, in which the so-called causative is palpably the denominative of a derived noun, are: pālaya from √pā protect;
prīṇaya from √prī; līnaya (according to grammarians) from √lī; dhū–
naya (not causative in sense) from √dhū; bhīṣaya from √bhī; ghātaya
from √han; sphāvaya from √sphā orsphāy.
n. In the Prakrit, the causative stem is made from all roots by the
addition of (the equivalent of) āpaya; and a number (about a dozen) of
like formations are quotable from Sanskrit texts, mostly of the latest period; but three, krīḍāpaya, jīvāpaya, and dīkṣāpaya, occur in the epics;
and two, aśāpaya and kṣālāpaya, even in the Sūtras.
1043. Inflection : Present-System. The causative
stem is inflected in the present-system precisely like other
381 CAUSATIVE. [--1043
b. Only one dual mid. form in āite occurs: mādáyāite (RV.).
The only RV. mid. form in āi, except in 1st du., is mādayādhvāi.
The primary endings in 2d and 3d sing. act. are more common than the
secondary.
3. Present Optative.
active.
dhāráyeyam dhāráyeva dhāráyema
etc. etc. etc.
stems in % a (733 a): it will be sufficient to give here in
general the first persons of the different formations, taking
as model the stem -JTfTf dhāráya, from √U dhṛ. Thus:
1. Present Indicative.
active.
s. d. p.
l ~TTTM% ^T"JT"ĪĪ ^ ^TÍTTRĪĪ ^
dhāráyāmi dhāráyāvas dhāráyāmas
etc. etc. etc.
middle.
s. d. p.
dhāráye dhāráyāvahe dhāráyāmahe
etc. etc. etc.
a. The 1st pl. act. in masi greatly outnumbers (as ten to one) that
in mas in both RV. and AV. No example occurs of 2d pl. act. in thana,
nor of 3d sing. mid. in e for ate.
2. Present Subjunctive.
For the subjunctive may be instanced all the forms noted as
occurring in the older language:
l
2
dhāráyāṇi
dhāráyāsi
dhāráyās
dhāráyāti
dhāráyāt
dhāráyāva dhāráyāma
dhāráyāthas dhāráyātha
dhāráyātas dhāráyān
active.
middle.
1
2
3
dhāráyāi
dhāráyāse
dhāráyāte
dhāráyātāi
dhāráyāvahāi
dhāráyāite
dharáyādhve
dhāráyādhvāi
1043—] XIV . SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION. 382
middle.
dhāráyeya dhāráyevahi dhāráyemahi
etc. etc. etc.
0. Optative forms are very rare in the oldest language (four in RV.,
two in AV.); they become more common in the Brāhmaṇas. A 3d sing,
mid. in īta instead of eta (cf. 738 b) occurs once in B. (kāmayīta AB.),
is not very rare in S. (a score or two of examples are quotable), and
is also found in MBh. and later. Of a corresponding 3d pl. in īran only
one or two instances can be pointed out (kāmayīran AŚS., kalpayīran
AGS.).
4. Present Imperative.
active.
dhāráya dhāráyatam dhāráyata
etc. etc. etc.
middle.
2 -jTr“F-f -īrśwīī^
dhāráyasva dhāráyethām dhāráyadhvam
etc. etc. etc.
d. Imperative persons with the ending tat occur: dhārayatāt (AV.)
and cyāvayatāt (ŚB.) are 2d sing.; pātayatāt (ŚB.) is 3d sing.; gama¬
yatāt and cyāvayatāt (K. etc.), and vārayatāt (TB.) are used as 2d
pl. Vārayadhvāt (K. etc.) is 2d pl.,' and the only known example of
such an ending (see above, 549 b).
5. Present Participle.
U\{t\TMl dhāráyant ^I^HIUI dhāráyamāṇa.
e. The feminine of the active participle is regularly and usually made
in antī (449 c). But a very few examples in atī are met with (one in
the older language: namayatī Āpast.).
f. Themiddle participle in māna is made through the whole history
of the language, from RV. (only yātáyamāna) down, and is the only
one met with in the earlier language (for ī́rayānas [sic!], MS. ii. 7.12,
is evidently a false reading, perhaps for írayā nas). But decidedly more
common in the epics and later is one formed with āna: e. g. kāmayāna,
eintayana, pālayāna, vedayāna. It is quotable from a larger number
of roots than is the more regular participle in māna. As it occurs in
no accentuated text, its accent cannot be given.
383 CAUSATIV E [—1046
6. Imperfect.
active.
i 5rurśriīī^ śrarrśrnEf^rśrn~
ádhārayam ádhārayāva ádhārayāma
etc etc etc
middle.
ádhāraye ádhārayāvahi ádhārayāmahi
etc etc etc
1044. As was above pointed out, the formations from the causative
stem in aya outside the present-system are m the oldest language very
limited. In RV. are found two forms of the future in syāmi, one passive
participle (coditá), and ten infinitives in dhyāi; also one or two derivative nouns in tṛ (bodhayitṛ́, codayitrī́), five in ìṣṇu, seven in ltnu,
and a few in a (atipārayá, nidhārayá, vācamīṅkhayá, viśvamejaya),
and in u (dhārayú, bhāvayú, mandayú). In AV,, also two s-future
forms and four gerunds m tvā; and a few derivative noun-stems, from
one of which is made a periphrastic perfect (gamayā́ṁ cakāra). In the
Brāhmaṇas, verbal derivative forms become more numerous and various, as
will be noted in detail below
1045. Perfect. The accepted causative perfect is the
periphrastic (1071a); a derivative noun in ā is made from
the causative stem, and to its accusative, in am, is added
the auxiliary thus,
UTijTJT ^^\{ dhārayā́ṁ cakāra (or āsa: 1070b)
tT5fī dhārayā́ṁ cakre
a. Of this perfect no example occurs in RV or SV or VS ‚ only one
— gamayā́ṁ cakāra — m A V , and but half-a-dozen in all the various
texts of the Black Yajur-Veda, and these not m the mantra-parts of the
text. They are also by no means frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, except in
ŚB. (where they abound chiefly, perhaps, for the reason that this work
uses in considerable part the perfect instead of the imperfect as its narrative
tense).
1046. Aorist. The aorist of the causative conjugation
is the reduplicated, which in general has nothing to do
with the causative stem, but is made directly from the root.
a. It has been already fully described (above, 856 ff.),
b. Its association with the causative is probably founded on an
original intensive character belonging to it as a reduplicated form,
and is a matter of gradual growth in the Veda it is made from a
1046-j XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 384
considerable number of roots (in RV., more than a third of its instances ; in AV.. about a fifth) which have no causative stem in aya.
e. The causative aorist of yTJ dhṛ, then, is as follows:
1 -M{I-h \ ^-fta‡T~ 3^to7FT
ádīdharam ádīdharāva ádīdharāma
etc. etc. etc.
1 ^0~^f % y{ÌM(IHRi
ádīdhare ádīdharāvahi ádīdharāmahi
etc. etc. etc.
An example was inflected in full at 864.
1047. In a few cases, where the root has assumed a peculiar
form before the causative sign — as by the addition of a p or s
(above, 1042iff.) — the reduplicated aorist is made from this form
instead of from the simple root: thus, atiṣṭhipam from sthāp (stem
sthāpaya) for √sthā. Aorist-stems of this character from quasi-roots
in āp are arpipa (√ṛ), jījapa or jījipa, jijñapa or jijñipa, śiśrapa,
tiṣṭhipa, jīhipa; the only other example from the older language is
bībhiṣa from bhīṣ for √bhī.
1048. But a few sporadic forms of an iṣ-aorist from causative conjugation-stems are met with: thus, dhvanayīt (RV.; TS. has instead the
wholly anomalous dhvanayit), vyathayīs and āilayīt (AV.), pyāyayiṣ¬
ṭhās and avādayiṣṭhās (KBU.), in the older language (RV. has also
ūnayīs from a denominative stem); in the later, ahlādayiṣata (DKC),
and probably aghātayithās (MBh.; for -iṣṭhās: cf. 904d). The passive
3d sing, aropi, from the causative ropaya, has a late occurrence (Śatr.).
1049. A precative is of course allowed by the grammarians to be
made for the causative conjugation: in the middle, from the causative stem
with the auxiliary i substituted for its final a; in the active, from the
form of the root as strengthened in the causative stem, but without the
causative sign: thus,
S-iltHHH^dhāryāsam etc. -ÍT^f?T-ft—
dhārayiṣīya etc.
This formation is to be regarded as purely fictitious.
1050. Futures. Both futures, with the conditional,
are made from the causative stem, with the auxiliary ^ i‚
which takes the place of its final ET a. Thus:
S-Future.
m^íll^Ulfìr dhārayiṣyā́mi etc. mjfiī-^ dhārayiṣyé etc.
^U(íí|->UrT dhārayiṣyánt Ui(fà-<L(HlUi dhārayiṣyámāṇa
385 CAUSATIVE . [—1051
Conditional.
WflJítlH^ádhārayiṣyam etc E^i^ill ^ ádhārayiṣye etc
Periphrastic Future.
^I(íílri(ít–H dhārayitā́smi etc.
a. It has been mentioned above that RV. and AV. contain only two
examples each of the s-future, and none of the periphrastic. The former
begin to appear in the Brāhmaṇas more numerously, but still sparingly,
with participles, and conditional (only adhārayiṣyat ŚB.; alāpayiṣya¬
thās ChU.); of the latter, ŚB. affords two instances (pārayitā́smi and
janayitā́si). Examples of both formations are quotable from the later
language (including the middle form darśayitāhe: 947 c).
1051. Verba l Nouns and Adjectives. These are
made in two different ways: either 1. from the full causative stem (in the same manner as the futures, just described) ; or 2. from the causatively strengthened root-form
(with loss of the causative-sign).
a. To the latter class belong the passive participle, as dhārita;
the gerundive and gerund in ya‚ as dhārya, -dhārya; and the gerund
in am, as dhāram; also, in the older language, the root-infinitive,
as -dhāram etc. (970 a). To the former class belong the infinitive
and the gerund in tvā, as dhārayitum, dhārayitvā, and the gerundive
in tavya, as dhārayitavya (also, in the older language, the infinitives
in tavāi and dhyāi, as jánayitavāí, īrayádhyāi, etc.). The auxiliary
i is taken in every formation which ever admits that vowel.
b. Examples of the passive participle are īritá, vāsita, śrāvitá.
But from the quasi-root jñap (1042j) is made jñapta, without unionvowel.
c. Examples of the infinitive and gerund in tvā are jóṣayitum,
dhā́rayitum; kalpayitvā́, arpayitvā́. But in the epics, and even later,
infinitives are occasionally made with loss of the causative-sign: e. g.
śeṣitum, bhāvitum, dhāritum, mocitum.
d. Examples of the gerunds in ya and am are -bhā́jya, -ghārya,
-pādya, -vāsya, nāyya, -sthāpya; -bhā́jam, -sthāpam. But stems
showing in the root-syllable no difference from the root retain ay of the
causative-sign in the gerund, to distinguish it from that belonging to the
primary conjugation: e. g. -kramáyya, -gamáyya, -janáyya, -jvaláyya,
-kalayya, -śamayya, -racayya, -āpayya.
e. Examples of the gerundive in tavya are tarpayitavyà, gam¬
ayitavya, hvāyayitavya; of that in ya, sthā́pya, hā́rya, yājya; of
that in anīya, sthāpanīya, bhāvanīya.
1051—] XIV . SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION. 386
f. Examples of other formations occurring in the older language are
as follows: root-infinitive, -sthāpam, -vāsas; — infinitive in tu, other
cases than accusative, -janayitave; jánayitavāí, pā́yayitavāí, -ścot¬
ayitavāí; śámayitos; — infinitivein dhyāi, iṣayádhyāi, īrayádhyāi,
taṃsayádhyāi, nāśayádhyāi, mandayádhyāi, mādayádhyāi, riṣ¬
ayádhyāi, vartayádhyāi, vājayádhyāi, syandayádhyāi (all RV.);
— gerundive in āyya, panayā́yya, spṛhayā́yya, trayayā́yya (P √trā).
g. Other noun-derivatives from the causative stem are not infrequent,
being decidedly more numerous and various than from any other of the
secondary conjugation-stems. Examples (of other kinds than those instanced
in 1044) are: árpaṇa, dāpana, prīṇana, bhī́ṣaṇa; jñāpaka, ropaka;
patayālú, spṛhayālu; jánayati, jñapti.
h. All the classes of derivatives, it will be noticed, follow in regard
to accent the analogy of similar formations from the simple root, and show
no influence of the special accent of the causative-stem.
1052. Derivativ e or Tertiary Conjugations.
From the causative stem are made a passive and a desiderative conjugation. Thus:
a. The passive-stem is formed by adding the usual passive-sign ĪJ yá to the causatively strengthened root, the causative-sign being dropped: thus, īJTīī?T dhāryáte.
b. Such passives are hardly found in the Veda (only bhājyá- AV.),
but some thirty instances are met with in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras: examples are jñapyá- (TS.), sādya- (K.), pādya- (AB.), vādya- (TB.),
sthāpya- (0B.); and they become quite common later.
o. The desiderative stem is made by reduplication and
addition of the sign ^~ iṣa, of which the initial vowel replaces
the final ofthe causative stem: thus, í^i(Knícl dídhārayiṣati.
d. These, too, are found here and there in the Brāhmaṇas and later
(about forty stems are quotable): examples are pipāyayiṣa (K,), bibhāv¬
ayiṣa and cikalpayiṣa and lulobhayiṣa (AB.), dídirāpayiṣa and rirādh¬
ayiṣa and āpipayiṣa (ŚB.), and so on.
e. As to causatives made from the intensive and desiderative stems,
see above, 1025, 1039.
V. Denominative.
1053. A denominative conjugation is one that has for
its basis a noun-stem.
a. It is a view now prevailingly held that most of the presentsystems of the Sanskrit verb, along with other formations analogous with a
387 DENOMINATIVE. l—1056
present-system, are in their ultimate origin denominative; and that many
apparent roots are of the same character. The denominatives which are so
called differ from these only in that their origin is recent and undisguised.
1054. The grammarians teach that any noun-stem in
the language may be converted, without other addition than
that of an ^ a (as union-vowel enabling it to be inflected
according to the second general conjugation) into a presentstem, and conjugated as such.
a. But such formations are rare in actual use. The RV. has a few
isolated and doubtful examples, the clearest of which is bhiṣákti he heals,
from bhiṣáj physician; it is made like a form of the root-class; abhiṣṇak
seems to be its imperfect according to the nasal class; and pátyate he
rules appears to be a denominative of páti master; other possible cases
are isaṇas etc., kṛpáṇanta, taruṣema etc., vanuṣanta, bhurajanta,
vánanvati. From the other older texts are quotable kavyánt (TS.),
áślonat (TB.), unmūlati (SB.), svadhāmahe (ŚŚS.). And a considerable number of instances, mostly isolated, are found in the later language:
e. g. kalahant (MBh.), arghanti (Pañc.), abjati (Śatr.), gardabhati
(SD.), utkaṇṭhate (SD.), jagannetrati (Pras.), keliśvetasahasra¬
pattrati (Pras.).
1055. In general, the base of denominative conjugation
is made from the noun-stem by means of the conjugationsign 7J ya, which has the accent.
a. The identity of this ya with the ya of the so-called causative
conjugation, as making with the final a of a noun-stem the causativesign aya, is hardly to be questioned. What relation it sustains to the ya
of the ya-class (759), of the passive (768), and of the derivative intensive stem (1016), is much more doubtful.
1056. Intermediate between the denominative and causative
conjugations stands a class of verbs, plainly denominative in origin,
but having the causative accent. Examples, beginning to appear at the
earliest period of the language, are montráyate speaks, takes counsel,
(from mantra, √man + tra), kīrtáyati commemorates (from kīrti,
√kṛ praise), artháyati or -te makes an object of, seeks (from ártha goal,
object), varṇayati depicts (from varṇa color), kathayati or -te gives
the how of anything, relates (from katham how f), and so on. These,
along with like forms from roots which have no other present-system
(though they may make scattering forms outside that system from
the root directly), or which have this beside other present-systems
without causative meaning, are reckoned by the grammarians as a
separate conjugation-class, the cur-class (above, 607, 775).
1057—] XIV. SECONDARY CONJUGATION. 388
1057. Denominatives are formed at every period in the
history of the language, from the earliest down.
a. They are frequent in RV., which contains over a hundred,
of all varieties; AV. has only half as many (and personal forms from
hardly a third as many: from the rest, present participles, or derivative nouns); AB., less than twenty; ŚB., hardly more than a dozen;
and so on. In the later language they are quotable by hundreds,
but from the vast majority of stems occur only an example or two;
the only ones that have won any currency are those that have assumed
the character of "cur-class" verbs.
1058. The denominative meaning is, as in other languages, of the greatest variety; some of the most frequent
forms of it are: be like, act as, play the part of; regard
or treat as; cause to be, make into; use, make applicationof; desire,wish for, crave — that which is signified by
the noun-stem.
a. The modes of treatment of the stem-final are also various;
and the grammarians make a certain more or less definite assignment
of the varieties of meaning to the varieties of form; but this allotment finds only a dubious support in the usages of the words as met
with even in the later language, and still less in the earlier. Hence
the formal classification, according to the final of the noun-stem
and the way in which this is treated before the denominative sign yá,
will be the best one to follow.
1059. From stems in a. a. The final a of a noun-stem
oftenest remains unchanged: thus, amitrayáti plays the enemy, is
hostile; devayáti cultivates the gods, is pious.
b. But final a is also often lengthened: thus, aghāyáti plans
mischief; priyāyáte holds dear; aśvāyáti seeks for horses; aśanāyáti
desires food.
c. While in the Veda the various modes of denominative formation
are well distributed, no one showing a marked preponderance, in the later
language the vast majority of denominatives (fully seven eighths) are of
the two kinds just noticed: namely, made from a-stems, and of the form
aya or aya, the former predominating. And there is seen a decided tendency to give the denominatives in aya an active form and transitive meaning, and those in āya a middle form and intransitive or reflexive meaning.
In not a few cases, parallel formations from the same stem illustrate this
distinction: e. g. kaluṣayati makes turbid, kaluṣāyate is or becomes
wbid; tarunayati rejuvenates, taruṇāyate is rejuvenated; śithilayati
loosens, śithilāyate grows loose. No distinct traces of this distinction are
389 DENOMINATIVE. [—1064
recognizable in the Veda, although there also corresponding forms with short
a and with long ā sometimes stand side by side.
d. Final a is sometimes changed to ī (very rarely i): thus,
adhvarīyáti performs the sacrifice; taviṣīyáti is mighty; putrīyáti or
putriyáti desires a son; māṃsīyáti craves flesh; sajjīyate is ready;
condrakāntīyati is moonstonelike. Notflftystems of this form are quotable.
e. It is occasionally dropped (after n or r): thus, turaṇyáti is
rapid; adhvaryáti performs the sacrifice.
f. Other modes of treatment are sporadic: thus, the addition of s,
as in stanasyati seeks the breast; the change of a to e, as in vareyáti
plays the wooer.
1060. From stems in ā. Final ā usually remains, as in gopāy¬
áti plays the herdsman, protects; pṛtanāyati fights; but it is sometimes
treated in the other methods of an a-stem: thus, pṛtanyati fights; tilotta¬
mīyati acts Tilottama.
1061. From stems in i, Ī, and u, Ū. Such stems are (especially
those in u, ū) very rare. They show regularly ī and ū before ya: thus,
arātīyáti (also -tiy-) plots injury; janīyáti (also -niy-) seeks a wife;
sakhīyáti desires friendship; nārīyate turns woman; — śatrūyáti acts
the foe; ṛjūyáti is straight; vasūyáti desires wealth; asūyáti grumbles,
is discontented: with short u, gātuyáti sets in motion.
a. More rarely, i or u is treated as a (or else is gunated, with loss
of a y or v): thus, dhunayáti comes snorting; laghayati makes easier.
Sometimes, as to a (above, 1059f), a sibilant is added: thus, aviṣyáti
is vehement; uruṣyáti saves. From dhī, RV. makes dhiyāyáte.
1062. From other vowel-stems, a. Final ṛ is changed to rī:
thus, mātrīyáti treats as a mother (only quotable example).
b. The diphthongs, in the few cases that occur, have their final element changed to a semivowel: thus, gavyáti seeks cattle, goes a-raiding.
1063. From con sonant-stems. A final consonant usually remains
before ya: thus, bhiṣajyáti plays the physician, cures; ukṣaṇyáti acts
like a lull; apasyáti is active; namasyáti pays reverence; sumanasyáte
is favorably disposed; taruṣyáti jlīghts.
a. But a final n is sometimes dropped, and the preceding vowel treated as a final: thus, rājāyáte or rājīyáti is kingly, from rājan; -karma¬
yati from -karman; svāmīyati treats as master, from svāmin: vṛṣā¬
yáte from vṛṣan is the only example quotable from the older language.
Sporadic cases occur of other final consonants similarly treated: thus, ojā¬
yáte from ojas, -manāyate from -manas; — while, on the other hand,
an a-vowel is occasionally added to such a consonant before ya: thus, iṣa¬
yáti from iṣ, satvanāyati from satvan.
1064. The largest class of consonantal stems are those showing a s
before the ya; and, as has been seen above, a sibilant is sometimes, by
analogy, added to a final vowel, making the denominative-sign virtually sya
1064—] XIV . SECONDAR Y CONJUGATION . 390
— or even, with a also added after an i- or u-vowel, asya; and this comes
to be recognized by the grammarians as an independent sign, forming denominatives that express desire: thus, sumakhasyáte is merry; jīvanasya-
(in -syā́ love of life)vṛṣasyati desires the male (the only quotable examples) ; madhuṣyati or madhvasyati longs for honey; kṣīrasyati craves
milk.
1065. The grammarians reckon as a special class of denominatives
in kāmya what are really only ordinary ones made from a compound nounstem having kāma as its final member: thus, rathakāmyati longs for
the chariot (K.: only example found in the older language); arthakām¬
yati desires wealth; putrakāmyati wishes a son (the only quotable examples) ; coming from the possessive compounds rathakāma etc. And arthā¬
pāyati treats as property is a (sole quotable) example of a stem having the
Prakritic causative form (1042n).
a. Stems of anomalous formation are drāghaya from dīrgha, draḍh¬
aya from dṛḍha, and perhaps mradaya from mṛdu.
1066. a. A number of denominative stems occur in the Veda for
which no corresponding noun-stems are found, although for all or nearly
all of them related words appear: thus, aṅkūyá, stabhūyá, iṣudhya;
dhiṣaṇyá, riṣaṇyá, ruvaṇya, huvanya, iṣaṇyá; ratharyá, śratharyá,
saparyá; iyasya (ŚB.), irasyá, daśasyá, makhasyá, panasyá, sa¬
casyá. Those in anya, especially, look like the beginnings of a new
conjugation-class.
b. Having still more that aspect, however, are a Vedic group of stems
in āya, which in general have allied themselves to present-systems of the
nā-class (732), and are found alongside the forms of that class: thus,
gṛbhāyáti beside gṛbhṇāti. Of such, RV. has gṛbhāyá, mathāyá,
pruṣāyá, muṣāyá, śrathāya, skabhāyá, stabhāyá. A few others
have no nā-class companions: thus, damāyá, śamāyá, tudāyá (AV,);
and panāya, naśāya, vṛṣāya (√vṛṣ rain), vasāyá (√vas clothe), and
perhaps aśāya (√aś attain).
c. Here may be mentioned also quasi-denominatives made from ono¬
matopoetic combinations of sounds, generally with repetition: e. g. kiṭaki¬
ṭāya, thatathatarāya, miṣamiṣāya, śaraśarāya.
1067. The denominative stems in RV. and A V. with causative accentuation are: RV. aṅkháya, artháya, iṣáya (also iṣayá), ūrjáya, ṛtáya,
kṛpáya, mantráya, mṛgáya, vavráya, vājáya (also vājayá), vīláya,
suṣváya (also suṣvayá); A V. adds kīrtáya, dhūpā́ya, pāláya, vīráya,
sabhāgáya.
a. The accent of ánniya and hástaya (RV.) is wholly anomalous.
1068. Inflection. The denominative stems are inflected with regularity like the other stems ending in SI a
(733 a) throughout the present-system. Forms outside of
391 DENOMINATIVE. [—1069
that system — except from the stems which are reckoned
to the causative or cur-class, and which follow in all respects the rules for that class — are of the utmost rarity.
a. In RV. occurs no form not belonging to the present-system, except
ūnayīs (with mā́prohibitive), an iṣ-aorist 2d sing. (cf. 1048). Further
examples of this aorist are āsūyīt (ŚB.), pāpayiṣṭa (TS.: pl., with mā́
prohibitive), and avṛṣāyiṣata (VS. etc.). The form ásaparyāit (AV.
xiv. 2. 20), with āi for ī (555c), might be aorist; but, as the metre
shows, is probably a corrupt reading; amanasyāit, certainly imperfect,
appears to occur in TB. (ii, 3. 8
3
). Other forms begin to appear in the
Brāhmaṇas: e. g. the futures gopāyiṣyati (ŚB.), meghāyiṣyánt, kaṇ¬
ḍūyiṣyánt, śīkāyiṣyánt (TS.), the participles bhiṣajyitá (? JB. -jita)
and iyasitá (ŚB.), kaṇḍūyitá, śīkitá, and meghitá (TS.), the gerund
saṁślákṣṇya (ŚB.), and so on. In the later language, also, forms outside the present-system (except the participle in ta) are only sporadic; and
of tertiary conjugation forms there are hardly any: examples are the causa¬
tives dhūmāyaya and asūyaya (MBh.), and the desiderative abhiṣiṣena¬
yiṣa (Śiś.),
b. Noun-derivatives from denominative stems follow the analogy of
those from causative stems (1051 g). In the older language, those in u
and ā (especially the former) are much themost numerous; later, that in
ana prevails over all others.
CHAPTE R X V .
PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION.
1069. ONE periphrastic formation, the periphrastic
future, has been already described (942 ff.),since it has
become in the later language a recognized part of every
verbal conjugation, and since, though still remaining essentially periphrastic, it has been so fused in its parts and altered in construction as to assume in considerable measure
the semblance of an integral tense-formation.
By far the most important other formation of the
class is —
1070—] XV. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION, 392
The Periphrastic Perfect.
1070. This (though almost unknown in the Veda,
coming only gradually into use in the Brāhmaṇas) is a
tense widely made and frequently used in the. ^classical
Sanskrit.
a. It is made by prefixing the accusative of a derivative noun-stem in īJT ā (accented) to the perfect tense of an
auxiliary verb: namely, of √sfī kṛ make, more often of
√3BRT ás be, and very rarely of √Vf bhū be.
b. In the older language (see below, 1073 d), kṛ is almost the only
auxiliary used in making this tense, as occurring very few times, and bhū
never. Later, also, bhū is quite rare (it is found nine times in MBh.,
six times in Rgh., and a few times elsewhere), but as gains very greatly
in currency, having become the usual auxiliary, while kṛ is only exceptional.
C Somewhat similar formations with yet other auxiliaries are not
absolutely unknown in the later language: thus, varayām pracakramus
(MBh.), pūrayām (etc.) vyadhus (Vīracaritra), mṛgayām avāsīt (ib.).
1071. The periphrastic perfect occurs as follows:
a. It is the accepted perfect of the derivative conjugations : intensive, desiderative, causative, and denominative;
the noun in ā́ being made from the present-stem which is
the general basis of each conjugation: thus, from √~^budh,
intensive STTSrETFT bobudhām, desiderative SPT?-TO bubhutsām,
causative Sf““FTJbodhayām; denominative H^tilH^mantray¬
ām.
b. The formation from causative stems (including those denominatives
which have assumed the aspect of causatives: 1056) is by far the most
frequent. Only a few desideratives are quotable (1034 a), and of intensives only jāgarām āsa (1020a; beside jajāgāra),
c. Most roots beginning with a vowel in a heavy syllable
5
(long by nature or long by position) make this perfect
only, and not the simple one: thus, ^IH M āsām from √STIīī
as lit, ^TFT^ īkṣām from √^ŚMkṣ see; 3ī"Tīī^ujjhām from
√3^K ujh forsake; "ft—íTīī^edhām from √~SJ^edh thrive (the
only examples quotable).
393 PERIPHRASTIC PERFECT. [—1073
d. Excepted are the roots āp and āñch, and those beginning with
a before two consonants (and taking ān as reduplication: 788).
» e. The roots (that is, stems reckoned by the grammarians as roots) of
more than one syllable have their perfect of this formation: thus, cakāsam.
But ūrṇu (713) is said to form ūrṇonāva only; while jāgṛ (1020)
makes a perfect of either formation, and daridrā (1024 a) is said to do
the same.
f. A few other roots make the periphrastic in addition to the usual
reduplicated perfect. Thus, in the older language only are found the stems
cāyām, tāyām, nilayām, vāsām (√vas dwell), vidām (√vid know),
vyayām, and the reduplicated stems bibhayām and juhavām; the later
language adds ayām, jayām, dayām, nayām, smayām, hvayām, and
the reduplicated bibharām; and the grammarians teach like formations
from uṣ, kās, and the reduplicating hrī. The stem is made in every case
from the present-stem, with guṇa of a final vowel.
1072. The periphrastic perfect of the middle voice is
made with the middle inflection of √3fí kṛ. For passive
use, the auxiliaries ~īī as and bhū are said to be allowed
to take a middle inflection.
a. One or two late examples of bhū with middle inflection have been
pointed out, but none of as.
b. It is unnecessary to give a paradigm of this formation, as
the inflection of the auxiliaries is the same as in their independent
use: for that of √kṛ, see 800k; of √bhū, see 800 d; of √as, see 800m.
c The connection of the noun and auxiliary is not so close that other
words are not occasionally allowed to come between them: thus, mīmāṃ¬
sā́m evá cakré (ŚB.) he merely speculated; vidāṁ vS idam ayaṁ
cakāra (JB.) he verily knew this; prabhraṃśayāṁ yo naghuṣaṁ ca¬
kāra who made Naghusha fall headlong (Rgh.).
1073. The above is an account of the periphrastic formation
with a derivative noun in ām as it appears especially in the later
language; earlier, its aspect is rather that of a more general, but
quite infrequent, combination of such a noun with various forms of
the root kṛ. Thus:
a. Of the periphrastic perfect occurs only a single example in the
whole body of Vedic texts (metrical): namely, gamayā́ṁ cakāra -(AV.),
In the Brāhmaṇas examples from causative stems begin to appear more
freely, but are everywhere few in number, except in ŚB. (which has them
from twenty-four Toots, and a few of these in several occurrences). From
desiderative stems they are yet rarer (only seven occurrences, five of them
in ŚB.: see 1034 a); and from intensives they are unknown. The periphrastic perfects of primary conjugation were noted above (1071 f: in ŚB.,
1073—] XV. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION. 394
eight stems and about eighty occurrences, chiefly from īkṣ‚ bhī, and vid;
that from vid is found in the greatest number of texts),
b. Forms with the aorist of the auxiliary are in the oldestBrāhmaṇas
as numerous as those with the perfect. Thus, with akar occur ramayām
(K‚), janayā́m and sādayā́m and svadayā́m and sthāpayā́m (MS.);
and with akran, vidā́m (TS. TB. MS.). With the aorist optative or
precative has been found only pāvayā́ṁ kriyāt (MS.).
c. Like combinations with other tenses are not entirely unknown:
thus, juhavāṁ karoti (ŚŚS.). So also in the later language, where have
been found quotable half-a-dozen such cases as vidāṁ karoti (Pane),
vidāṁ karotu and kurvantu (Pane etc.).
d. Only two or three cases of the use of as instead of kṛ as auxiliary are met with in the older language: they are man trayām āsa (AB.
GB,), janayām āsa (ŚvU.), and īkṣām āsa (ŚŚS.),
e. A single example of an accented auxiliary is met with in the accentuated texts-, namely, atirecayā́ṁ cakrús (ŚB.). As was to be expected,
from the nature of the combination, the noun also retains its accent (compare 945).
Participial Periphrastic Phrases.
1074. The frequent use, especially in the later language,
of a past or a future passive participle with the copula (or
also without it) to make participial phrases having a value
analogous to that of verb-tenses, has been already noticed
(999). But other similar combinations are not unknown
in any period of the language, as made with other auxiliaries, or with other participles.
a. They occur even in the Veda, but are far more common and
conspicuous in the Brāhmaṇas, and become again of minor account in the
later language.
1075. Examples of the various formations are as follows:
a. A (usually present) participle with the tenses of the verb i go.
This is the combination, on the whole, of widest and most frequent occurrence. Thus: áyajvano vibhájann éti védah (RV.) he ever gives away
the wealth of the non-offerer; yathā sūcyā vāsah saṁdadhad iyād
evam evāi 'tābhir yajñasya chidraṁ saṁdadhad eti (AB.) just as
one would mend [habitually] a garment with a needle, so with these one
mends any defect of the sacrifice; agnir vā idaṁ vāiśvānaro dahann
āit (PB.) Agni Vaiśvūnara kept burning this creation; tè 'surāḥ párā¬
jit ā yánto dyā́vāpṛthivī́ úpāśrayan (TB.) those Asuras, getting beaten,
took refuge with heaven and earth; tê 'sya gṛhā́ḥ paśáva upamūryá¬
māṇā īyuḥ (ŚB.) the animals, his family, would be continually destroyed.
395 PARTICIPIAL PHRASES. [—1076
b. The same with the verb car go (continually or habitually),signifying
still more distinctly than the preceding a continued or habitual action. Thus:
agnā́v agníś carati práviṣṭaḥ (AV.) Agni is constantly present in the
fire; adaṇḍyaṁ daṇḍena ghnantaś caranti (PB.) they make a practice
of beating with a rod what is undeserving of punishment.
0. The same with the verbs ās sit and sthā stand, with a like meaning. Thus, juhvata āsate (K.) they continue sacrificing; te 'pakramya
prativāvadato 'tiṣṭhan (AB.) they, having gone off, kept vehemently
refusing. In the later language, sthā is the verb oftenest used, with
predicates of various kind, to make a verbal phrase of continuance.
d. A present or future or perfect participle with as and bhū be.
The participle is oftenest a future one; as only is used in the optative,
bhū usually in other forms. Thus: yaḥ pūrvam anyānah syāt (AB.)
whoever may not have made sacrifice before; samāvad eva yajñe kur¬
vāṇā āsan (GB.) they did the same thing at the sacrifice; parikrī́ḍanta
āsan (MS.) they were playing about; yátra suptvā́ púnar na 'vadrā¬
syán bhávati (ŚB.) when, after sleeping, he is not going to fall asleep
again; havyaṁ hi vakṣyan bhavati (AB.) for he is intending to carry
the sacrifice; dāsyant syāt (K.) may be going to give; yéna vā́hanena
syantsyánt syā́t (ŚB.) with what vehicle he may be about to drive. True
expressions for perfect and pluperfect and future perfect time are capable
of being made by such means, and now and then are made, but in no
regular and continued fashion.
Composition with Prepositional Prefixes.
1076. All the forms, personal and other, of verbal conjugation — of both primary and secondary conjugation,
and even to some extent of denominative (so far as the
denominative stems have become assimilated in value to
simple roots) — occur very frequently in combination with
certain words of direction, elements of an adverbial character
(see the next chapter), the so-called prepositions (according
to the original use of that term), or the verbal prefixes.
a. Practically, in the later language, it is as if a compounded root
were formed, out of root and prefix, from which then the whole conjugation
(with derivatives: below, chap. XVII.) is made, just as from the simple
root. Yet, even there (and still more in the older language : 1081 a—c), the
combination is so loose, and the members retain so much of their independent
value, that in most dictionaries (that of Sir Monier Williams is an exception)
the conjugation of each root with prefixes is treated under the simple root,
and not in the alphabetic order of the prefix. Derivative words, however,
1076—] X V. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION. 396
are by universal agreement given in their independent alphabetic place, like
simple words.
1077. Those verbal prefixes which have value as such
throughout the whole history of the language are given
below, in alphabetic order, with their fundamental meanings:
a. Some of these, of course, are used much more widely and frequently
than others. In order of frequency in the older language (as estimated by
the number of roots with which they are found used in RV. and AV.), they
stand as follows: pra, ā, vi, sam, abhi, ni, ud, pari, anu, upa, prati,
ava, nis, ati, apa, parā, adhi, api, antar. Api is of very limited
use as prefix in the later language, having become a conjunction, too, also.
b. The meanings given above are only the leading ones. In combinations
of root and prefix they undergo much modification, both literal and figurative
— yet seldom in such a way that the steps of transition from the fundamental sense are not easy to trace. Sometimes, indeed, the value of a
against, in return;
fsf vi apart, asunder, away, out;
Wi sam along, with, together.
śrfH ati across, beyond, past, over, to excess;
śrftT ádhi above, over, on, on to;
anu after, along, toward;
W0[ antár between, among, within;
apa away, forth, off;
5ífq api unto, close upon or on;
abhi to, unto, against (often with implied violence);
i-fä áva down, off;
5Tī ā́ to, unto, at;
3
- Úd up, up forth or out;
3"-i upa to, unto, toward;
f--J ni down; in, into;
"Rīījnís out, forth;
q~f párā to a distance, away, forth;
ftf^ pari round about, around;
“ prá forward, onward, forth, fore;
—f^T prati in reversed direction, back to or against,
397 VERBA L PREFIXES . [—1081
root is hardly perceptibly modified by the addition of the prefix. An intensive force is not infrequently given by pari, vi, and sam.
1078. Prefixes essentially akin with the above, but more distinctly adverbial, and of more restricted use, are these:
ácha (or áchā) to, wnto.- tolerably frequent in RV. (used with
over twenty roots), but already unusual in AV. (only two roots),
quite restricted in B., and entirely lost in the later language;
avis forth to sight, in view: used only with the roots bhū, as,
and kṛ;
tirás through, crossways; out of sight: hardly used except with
kṛ, dhā, bhū (in RV., with three or four others);
purás in front, forward: used with only half-a-dozen roots,
especially kṛ, dhā, i ;
prādús forth to view: only with bhū, as, kṛ.
a. A few others, as bahis outside, vinā without, alam (with bhū
and kṛ) sufficiently, properly, sākṣāt in view, are still less removed from
ordinary adverbs.
1079. Of yet more limited use, and of noun-rather than adverbvalue, are:
śrad (or śrathP), only with dhā (in RV., once also with kṛ):
śraddhā believe, credit;
hin, only with kṛ (and obsolete in the classical language) : hiṅkṛ
make the sound, hing low, murmur.
a. AnJ beside these stand yet more fortuitous combinations: see
below, 1091.
1080. More than one prefix may be set before the same
root. Combinations of two are quite usual; of three, much
less common; of more than three, rare. Their order is in
general determined only by the requirements of the meaning,
each added prefix bringing a further modification to the
combination before which it is set. But ~T ā́ is almost
never allowed, either earlier or later, to be put in front
of any of the others.
a. The very rare cases of apparent prefixion of ā to another prefix
(as āvihanti MBh., āvitanvānaḥ BhP.) are perhaps best explained as
having the ā used independently, as an adverb.
1081. In classical Sanskrit, the prefix stands immediately
before the verbal form.
a. In the earlier language, however (especially in the Veda; in
the Brāhmaṇa less often and more restrictedly), its position is quite
1081—] XV. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION. 398
free: it may be separated from the verb by another word or words,
and may even come after the form to which it belongs; it may also
stand alone, qualifying a verb that is understood, or conjointly with
another prefix one that is expressed.
b. Thus, sá devā́ṃ é 'há vakṣyati (RV.) he shall bring the gods
hither; prá ṇa ā́yūṃṣi tāriṣat (AV.) may he lengthen out our lives; tā́v
ā́ yātam úpa dravát (RV.) do ye two come hither quickly; gámad
vā́jebhir ā́ sá nah (RV.) may he come with gifts hither to us; pari
mā́m pari me prajā́m pari ṇaḥ pāni yád dhánam (AV.) protect me,
my progeny, and what wealth we own; yátaḥ sadyá ā́ ca párā ca yánti
(AV.) from whence every day they advance and retire; vy àháṁ sárveṇa
pāpmánā [avṛtam] ví yákṣmeṇa sám ā́yuṣā (AV.) I have separated
from all evil, from disease, [I have joined myself] with life; vi hy
enena paśyati (AB.) for by it he sees; ví vā́ eṣá prajáyā paśúbhir
ṛdhyate (TB.) he is deprived of progeny and cattle.
c. Three or four instances have been cited from the later language
of a prefix separated from, or following, a verb; perhaps the prefix in every
such case admits of being regarded as an adverb.
1082. As regards the accent of verb-forms compounded with
prefixes, only the case needs to be considered in which the prefix
stands (as always in the later language) immediately before the verb;
otherwise, verb and prefix are treated as two independent words.
1083. a. A personal verbal form, as has been seen above
(592), is ordinarily unaccented: before such a form, the prefix has
its own accent; or, if two or more precede the same form, the one
nearest the latter is so accented, and the others lose their accent.
b. If, however, the verb-form is accented, the prefix or prefixes
lose their accent.
c. That is, in every case, the verb along with its normally
situated prefix or prefixes so far constitutes a unity that the whole
combination is allowed to take but a single accent.
d. Examples are: pare 'hi nāri púnar é 'hi kṣiprám (AV.) go
away, woman; come again quickly; áthā́ 'staṁ vipáretana (RV.) then
scatter ye away to your home; samā́cinuṣvā 'nusampráyāhi (AV.)
gather together, go forth together after; yád gṛhā́n upodāíti (AV.) when
he goes up to the house; evā́ ca tváṁ sarama ājagántha (RV.) now
that you, Saramā, have thus come hither; yénā́ "viṣṭitaḥ pravivéśithā
'páḥ (RV.) enveloped in which thou didst enter the waters.
1084. A prefix, however, not seldom has a more independent
value, as a general adverb of direction, or as a preposition (in the
usual modern sense of thatterm), belonging to and governing a noun;
in such case, it is not drawn in to form part of a verbal compound,
but has its own accent. The two kinds of use shade into one another,
and are not divisible by any distinct and fixed line.
399 VERBA L PREFIXES . L—1087
a. There is in RV. a considerable number of cases (some thirty) in
which the pada-text gives unnecessarily, and probably wrongly, an independent accent to a prefix before an accented verb (or other prefix): resolving, for example, ā́rūhat into ā́ áruhat, vyácet into ví ácet,
abhyávarṣīt into abhí ávarṣīt, vyā́sarat into ví ā́ asarat (instead of
ā-áruhat etc.).
1085. In combination with the non-personal parts of the verbsystem — with participles, infinitives, and gerunds — the general
rule is that the prefix loses its accent, in favor of the other member
of the compound. But the prefix instead has sometimes the accent:
namely, when combined —
a. with the passive participle in ta or na: thus, páreta gone
forth; antárhita concealed; ávapanna fallen; sámpūrṇa complete
(cf. 1284).
b. But some exceptions to this rule are met with: e. g., in RV.,
nicitá, niṣkṛtá, praśastá, niṣattá, etc.; in AV., apakrītá.
c. with the infinitive in tu (972), in all its cases: thus, sáṁ¬
hartum to collect; ápidhātave to cover up; ávagantos of descending.
The doubly accented dative in tavāí retains its final accent, but
throws the other back upon the prefix: thus, ánvetavāí forfollowing ; ápabhartavāí for carrying off.
1086. The closeness of combination between the root and the
prefix is indicated not only by their unity of accent, but also by the
euphonic rules (e. g. 185, 192), which allow the mutual adaptations
of the two to be made to some extent as if they were parts of a
unitary word.
1087. A few special irregularities call for notice:
a. In the later language, api, adhi, and ava, in connection with
certain roots and their derivatives, sometimes lose the initial vowel: namely,
api with nah and dhā‚ adhi with stha, ava with gāh etc.: e. g.
pinaddha, pihita, dhiṣṭhita, vagāhya, vataṃsa, vadānya, vaṣṭabhya,
vamajjana, vekṣaṇa, valepana. In the Veda, on the other hand, is
is in a few cases found instead (apparently) of nis with √kṛ.
b. The final vowel of a prefix, especially an i‚ is (oftenest in the
older language) sometimes lengthened, especially in derivative words: e, g.
pratīkāra, nīvṛt, parīhāra, vīrúdh, adhīvāsá, ápīvṛta, abhīvartá;
anūrúdh; avāyatī́, prāvṛ́ṣ, úpāvasu. In the Veda, the initial of anu
is sometimes lengthened after negative an: e. g. anōnudá, anānukṛtyá.
c. In combination with √i go, the prefixes parā, pari, and pra
sometimes change their r to 1. In this way is formed a kind of derivative
stem palāy flee, inflected according to the a-class, in middle voice, which
is not uncommon from the Brāhmaṇas down, and has so lost the consciousness of its origin that it sometimes takesthe augment prefixed: thus,
apalāyiṣṭhās (ŚŚS.), apalāyata (R.), apalāyanta (MBh.); it makes
1087---] XV. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION. 400
the periphrastic perfect palāyāṁ cakre. The stem palyay, similarly
inflected, occurs only in one or two texts (ŚB. JB. JUB.); and plāy has
been found nowhere except in MS. Also the imperfect nílāyata (TS. TB. :
not separated in the pada-text) and perfect nilayā́ṁ cakre (ŚB.) are
doubtless a corresponding formation from j/i with nis, though nearly akin
in form and meaning with forms from √lī + ni. So also pari becomes
pali in the combination palyaṅg (ŚB. ŚŚS.), whether viewed as a denominative formation or as √aṅg + pari. And MS. has once plā́kṣārayan
(iii. 10. 2; in an etymology).
d. The root kṛ make sometimes assumes (or retains from a more
original condition) an initial s after the prefixes sam, pari, nis, and upa:
thus, saṁskurute, samaskurvan, saṁskṛta, etc.; pariṣkṛṇvanti,
pariṣkṛta, etc.; nír askṛta; upaskṛta. And √kṛ scatter is said by
the grammarians to add s in the same manner, under certain circumstances,
after apa and prati (only apaskiramāṇa, praticaskare, both late,
are quotable).
e. The passive participle of the roots dā give and dā cut has often
the abbreviated form tta after a prefix — of which the final vowel, if i,
is lengthened (compare 955 f, and the derivative in ti, below, 1157 c).
f. In a few sporadic cases, the augment is taken before a prefix,
instead of between it and the root: thus, avaṣaṭkārṣīt (GB.); udapra¬
patat (AB.); anvasaṁcarat, pratyasaṁharat, pratyavyūhat, anv¬
avīkṣetām, apraiṣīt, asambhramat (MBh.); abhyanimantrayat
(Har.) ; vyāvasthāpi (SDS.) ; compare also the forms from palāy, above,
c. And AB. has once niniyoja (for niyuyoja, as read in the corresponding passage of ŚŚS.). Some of the apparent roots of the language have
been suspected of being results of a similar unification of root and prefix:
e. g. āp from ā + ap, vyac from vi + ac, tyaj from ati + aj.
g. The loss of the initial s of sthā and stambh after the prefix
ud has been noticed above (233 c). Also (137 a, c), certain peculiarities
of combination of a prefix with the initial vowel of a root,
1088. As to the more general adverbial uses of the prefixes,
and their prepositional uses, see the next chapter.
1089. As to the combination of the particles a or an privative, dus
ill, and su well, with verb-forms, see 1121b,g, I. As to the addition of
the comparative and superlative suffixes tarām and tamām to verbs, see
above, 473c.
Other Verbal Compounds.
1090. It has been seen above that some of the prepositional
prefixes are employed in combination with only very small classes
of roots, namely those whose meaning makes them best fitted for
auxiliary and periphrastic uses — such as kṛ make, bhū and as be,
dhā put, i go — and that the first of these are widely used in com-
401 VERBA L COMPOUNDS . [—1093
bination with a derivative in ām to make a periphrastic conjugation.
Such roots have also been, from the earliest period of the language,
but with increasing frequency, used in somewhat analogous combinations with other elements, substantive and adjective as well as
adverbial; and this has become, in part, developed finally into a
regular and indefinitely extensible method of increasing the resources
of verbal expression.
1091. a. The older language has a number of (mostly) reduplicative
onomatopoetic compounds with roots kṛ and bhū‚ the prefixed element ending in ā or ī (generally the former): thus, in RV., akkhalīkṛ́tya croaking, jañjonābhávant flimmering, alalābhávant making merry, kikirā́
kṛṇu tear; in AV., maṣmaṣā́ 'karam / have crushed; in VS., mas¬
masā́ (also TS.; MS. mṛsmṛsā́) kuru; in TS., malmalābhávant; in K,,
manmalābhavant, kikkitākāra; in MS., bibibābhávont, bhar¬
bhara 'bhavat; in AB., bababākurvant. The accentuation, where shown,
is like that of a verb-form with accompanying prefix.
b. Further, combinations with √kṛ of utterances used at the sacrifice, and mostly ending in ā: thus, svā́hā, svadhā́, svagā́; also váṣaṭ.
In these, too, the accentuation is generally that of a verb with prefix: e. g.
svagākaróti (ŚB.; but svadhā́ karóti [?] TA.), vaṣaṭkuryā́t (MS.);
and, with another prefix, anuváṣaṭkaroti (ŚB.).
c. An instance or two also occur of ordinary words in such combinations, put in corresponding form: thus, śūlā́ kuryāt (ŚB.) may roast
on a spit (śū́la); anṛṇākartos (AB.) of getting clear of debt; āikyā¬
bhāvayant (AA.) uniting.
1092. a. The noun namas obeisance, homage, in a still more purely
noun-value, becomes combined with √kṛ: in the Veda, only with the gerund, in namaskṛ́tya (beside hastogṛ́hya and karṇagṛ́hya: above, 990 b).
b. A solitary combination with √i go is shown by the accusative ás¬
tam home; which, appearing only in ordinary phrases in RV., is in AV.
compounded with the participles — in astaṁyánt, astameṣyánt, ásta¬
mita (with accent like that of ordinary compounds with a prefix) — and
in the Brāhmaṇas and the later language is treated quite like a prefix:
thus, astaméti (ŚB.).
c. Other ordinary accusative forms of adjectives in combination with
verbal derivatives of kṛ and bhū are found here and there in the older
language: thus, śṛtaṁkṛ́tya andnagnaṁkṛ́tya (TS.); nagnambhā́vuka,
pāmanambhavuka etc. (TS. et al.); ánaruṣkaroti (ŚB.).
1093. In the early but not in the earliest language, a nounstem thus compounded with kṛ or bhū (and very rarely with as),
in verbal nouns and ordinary derivatives, and then also in verbal
forms, begins to assume a constant ending ī (of doubtful origin).
a. There is no instance of this in RV., unless the ī of akkhalīkṛ́tya
(above, 1091a) is to be so explained. In AV., besides the obscure
1093—] XV. PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION. 402
vātíkṛta and vātīkārá, is found only phalīkáraṇa. In the Brāhmaṇa
language, examples begin to occur more often: thus, in TS., śyetī, mith¬
unī́, muṣṭī; in TB„ further, phalī́, krūrī́, udvāsī; in ŚB,, besides
some of these, also ekī́, kālvālī, tīvrī, daridrī, brāhmaṇī, mithunī́,
svī́; and aśvābhidhānī́, of which (as of muṣṭī) the ī might be that of
an ordinary grammatical form; in K,, dvī; in GB,, pravaṇī; in SB.,
vajrī; in AB., matī (from matya). From Upaniṣad and Sūtra are to
be added dvāitī (MU.), samī (KŚS.), navī and kuśalī (AGS.). The
accent is in general like that of the similar combinations treated above
(1091): e. g. krūrīkurvánti, svīkṛ́tya, brāhmaṇībhū́ya, mithunībhá¬
vantyāu, phalī́kartavāí, krūrī́kṛta; but sometimes a mere collocation
takes place: thus, mithunī́ bhávantīs (TS.), phalī́ kriyámāṇānām
(TB.), vajrī́ bhūtvā́ (TA.). The ī is variously treated: now as an un¬
combinable final, as in śyetí akuruta and mithunī́ abhavan (TS.);
now as liable to the ordinary conversions, as in mithuny ênayā syām,
mithuny abhiḥ syām, and svyàkurvata (ŚB.).
b. Out of such beginnings has grown in the later language the following rule:
1094. Any noun or adjective stem is liable to be compounded with verbal forms or derivatives of the roots y%
kṛ and HJbhū (and of -~T^as also; but such cases are extremely rare), in the manner of a verbal prefix. If the
final of the stem be an a- or i-vowel, it is changed to | ī;
if an u-vowel, it is changed to ū.
a. Examples are: stambhībhavati becomes a post; ekacittībhūya
becoming of one mind; upahārīkaroṣi thou makest an offering ; nakhapra¬
hārajarjarīkṛta torn to pieces with blows of the claws; śithilībhavanti
become loose,- kuṇḍalīkṛta ring-shaped: surabhīkṛta made fragrant;
ādhīkaraṇa pawning; ṛjūkṛtya straightening; hetūkaraṇa taking as
cause. As in the case of the denominatives (1059 c), the combinations
with a-stems are the immense majority, and occur abundantly (hardly less
than a thousand are quotable) in the later language, but for the most
part only once or twice each; those made with i- and u-stems are a very
small number. In a few instances, stems in an and as, with those
finals changed to ī, are met with: e. g. ātmī-kṛ, yuvī-bhū; unmanī¬
kṛ, amanī-bhū; final ya after a consonant is contracted to Ī: e. g.
kàṃsī-kṛ; and anomalous cases like kāṁdiśī-bhū occur. Final ṛ is said
to become rī, but no examples are quotable. The combinations with kṛ
are about twice as frequent as those with bhū, and examples with as do
not appear to have been brought to light.
b. Similar combinations are occasionally made with elements of questionable or altogether obscure character: e. g. urarī-kṛ, urī-kṛ.
c. Examples are not altogether wanting in the later language of ā as
403 NOUN- AND ADJECTIVE-COMPOUNDS. [—1098
CHAPTE R X V I
INDECLINABLES.
1096. THE indeclinable words are less distinctly divi¬
ded into separate parts of speech in Sanskrit than is usual
elsewhere in Indo-European language — especially owing
to the fact that the class of prepositions hardly has a real
existence, but is represented by certain adverbial words
which are to a greater or less extent used prepositionally.
They will, however, be briefly described here under the
usual heads.
Adverbs.
1097. Adverbs by Suffix. Classes of adverbs, sometimes of considerable extent, are formed by the addition
of adverb-making suffixes especially to pronominal roots or
stems, but also to noun and adjective stems.
a. There is no ultimate difference between such suffixes and the
ease-endings in declension; and the adverbs of this division sometimes are
used in the manner of cases.
1098. With the suffix tas are made adverbs having an ablative
sense, and not rarely also an ablative construction. Such are made:
a. From pronominal roots, in átas, itás, tátas, yátas, kútas,
amútas, svatas (not found earlier); from the pronominal stems in t or
final of the compounded noun-stem (cf. 1091): thus, duḥkhā-kṛ, niṣkulākṛ, śambā-kṛ, and one or two others.
1095. Of all the forms which constitute or are attached to the
verbal system, the passive participle is the one most closely assimilated in its treatment as a combinable element to an ordinary adjective.
Next to it come the gerund and the gerundives. Combinations of the
kind above treated of are quite common with passive participles and
gerunds.
1098—] XVI . INDECLINABLES . 404
d (494) of the personal pronouns: thus, mattás (only example in V.),
tvattas, asmattas, yuṣmattas; a n d from pronominal derivatives: thus,
itarátas, katarátas.
b. From noun and adjective stems of every class, since the earliest
period, but more freely lateT: e. g. mukhatás, agratás, ṛbhutás, rktas,
hṛttás, śīrṣatás, janmatas, nastás, yajuṣṭas, pārátas, anyátas,
anyatarátas, sarvátas, dakṣiṇatás, abhīpatás (once, in RV., from a
case-form: patsutás).
c. From a few prepositions: thus, abhítas, parítas, ántitas.
d. Examples of ablative construction are: áto bhū́yaḥ (RV.) inore
than that; tátaḥ ṣaṣṭhā́t (AV.) from that sixth; áto 'nyéna (ŚB.) with
any other than this; Barvato bhayāt (AGS.) from all fear; kutaś cid
deśād āgatya (H.) arriving from some region or other; purād itaḥ (R.)
from this city; tasmāt pretakāyataḥ (KSS.) from that dead body.
e. But the distinctive ablative meaning is not infrequently effaced,
and the adverb has a more general, especially a locative, value: thus,
agratás in front; asmatsamīpatas in our presence; dharmatas in
accordance with duty; chāgatas (H.) with reference to the goat; guṇato
'dhikaḥ (M.) superior in virtue.
1099. With the suffix tra (in the older language often trā) are
made adverbs having a locative sense, and occasionally also a locative construction.
a. These adverbs are very few, compared with those in tas. They
are formed chiefly from pronominal stems, and from other stems having a
quasi-pronominal character: namely, in tra, átra, tátra, yátra, kútra»
amútra, anyátra, viśvátra, sarvátra, ubhayátra, aparatra, uttara¬
tra, itarátra, anyataratra, pūrvatra, paratra, samānátra, ekatra,
anekatra, ekāikatra; in trā, asmatrā́, satrā́, purutrā́, bahutrā́^
dakṣiṇatrā́. But a few in trā come from ordinary nouns: thus, deva¬
trā́, martyatrā́, puruṣatrā́, manuṣyatrā́, pākatrā́, śayutrā́, kuru¬
pañcālatrā́. Those in trā are distinguished from the others by their
accent.
b. Examples of locative construction are: hásta ā́ dokṣiṇatrā́ (RV.)
in the right hand; yátrā́ 'dhi (RV.) in which; ekatra puruṣe (MBh.)
in a single man; atra mārātmake (H.) in this murderous creature; pra¬
bhutvaṁ tatra yujyate (H.) sovereignty befits him. And, as the locative
case is used also to express the goal of motion (304), so the adverbs in
tra have sometimes an accusative as well as a locative value: thus, tatra
gaccha go there or thither; pathó devatrā́ yā́nān (RV.) roads that go to
the gods.
1100. One or two other suffixes of locality are:
a. ha, in ihá here, kuha where? and the Vedic viśváha (also viś¬
váhā, viśvā́hā) always (compare below, 1104b); and ihá (like átra etc:
405 ADVERB S B Y DERIVATION . [—1102
1099b) is sometimes used with locative-case value: e. g. iha samaye
(H.) at this conjuncture.
b. tat, which is added to words having already a local or directive
Talue: thus, to adverbial accusatives, prā́ktāt, údaktāt, tā́vattāt; to
adverbial ablatives, ārā́ttāt, uttarā́ttāt, parākā́ttāt; and to prepositional
adverbs, paścā́tāt, adhástāt, avástāt, parástāt, purástāt, bahíṣṭāt.
Apparently by analogy with these last, the suffix has the form stāt in
upáriṣṭāt (and BhP. has udastāt),
c. hi, in uttarā́hi (ŚB.) and dakṣiṇāhi (not quotable).
1101. By the suffix thā are made adverbs of manner, especially
from pronominal roots or stems.
a. Thus, tátha, yáthā; kathā́ and itthā́ (by the side of which stand
kathám and itthám; and ŚB. has itthā́t); and the rare ìmàthā and
amúthā. And átha (V. often áthā) so then doubtless belongs with them.
Further, from a few adjective and noun stems, mostly of quasi-pronominal
character: thus, viśváthā, sarváthā, anyáthā, ubhayáthā, aparathā,
itaráthā, yataráthā, yatamáthā, katarathā, katamathā, pūrváthā,
pratnáthā, ūrdhváthā, tiraścáthā, ekathā (JB.), ṛtuthā́, nāmáthā
(once, AV.); and eváthā.
b. Yáthā becomes usually toneless in V,, when used in the sense
of iva after a noun forming the subject of comparison: thus, tāyávo
yathā (RV.) like thieves.
1102. One or two other suffixes of manner are:
a. ti, in iti thus, very commonly used, from the earliest period,
especially as particle of quotation, following the words quoted.
b. Examples are: brahmajāyé 'yám iti céd ávocan (RV.) if they
have said "this is a Brahman's wife"; táṁ devā́ abruvon vrā́tya kíṁ
nú tiṣṭhasī́ 'ti (AV.) the gods said to him: "Vrātya, why do you stand?"
Often, the iti is used more pregnantly: thus, yáḥ śraddádhāti sánti
devā́ iti (AV.) whoever has faith that the gods exist; taṁ vyāghram
munir mūṣiko 'yam iti paśyati (H.) the sage looks upon that tiger as
being really a mouse; yūyaṁ kim iti sīdatha (H.) why (lit. alleging
whatreason) do you sit?
c But iti is sometimes used in a less specialized way, to mark an
onomatopoeia, or to indicate a gesture: e. g. bahíṣ ṭe astu bā́l iti (AV.)
let it come out of you with a splash; ity ágre kṛṣáty áthé 'ti (ŚB.) he
ploughsfirstthis way, then this way; or it points forward to something to
be said: e. g. yan nv ity āhur anyāni chandāṃsi varṣīyāṃsi kas¬
mād bṛhaty ucyata iti (PB.) when now they say thus: "the other
metres are greater; why is the bṛhatī spoken?" It also makes a number
of derivatives and compounds: e. g. ititha the so-many-eth; itivat in this
fashion; ityartham for this purpose; itihāsa a story or legend (lit. thus
forsooth it was). As to the use of a nominative with iti as predicate to
an accusative, see 268 b.
1102—] XVI. INDECLINABLES . 406
d. With the suffix of íti is to be compared that of táti etc. (519).
The word is abbreviated to ti two or three times in ŚB.
e. va in iva (toneless) like, as, and evá (in V. often evā́), earlier
thus, later a particle emphasizing the preceding word; for thus is used
later the related evám, which hardly occurs in RV., and in AV. only with
√vid: as, eváṁ vidvā́n knowing thus.
f. In later Vedic (AV. etc., and the later parts of RV.) iva more
often counts for only a single syllable, 'va.
1103. a. By the suffix dā are made adverbs of time, but almost
only from pronominal roots.
b. Thus, tadā́, yadā́, kadā́ (in RV. also kádā), idā́ (only in V.);
and sádā, beside which is found earlier sádam. Besides these, in the
older language, only sarvada; later a few others, anyadā, ekadā, nit¬
yadā. A quasi-locative case use is seen occasionally in such phrases as
kadācid divase (R.) on a certain day.
c. By the perhaps related dānīm are made idā́nīm, tadanīm,
viśvadā́nīm, tvadānīm (toneless). Viśvadā́ni occurs as adjective in TB.
d. With rhi are made, from pronominal roots, tárhi, etárhi, yárhi,
kárhi, amúrhi.
e. The suffix di, found only in yádi if, is perhaps related with dā,
in form as in meaning. Sadadi (MS.) is of doubtful character.
1104. By the suffix dhā are formed adverbs especially from
numerals, signifying -fold, times, ways, etc.
a. Thus, ekadhā́, dvidhā́ (also dvídhā and dvedhā́), trídhā
(in the older language usually tredhā́), ṣaḍḍhā́ (also ṣoḍhā́ and ṣaḍ¬
dhā), dvādaśadhā́, ekānnaviṃśatidhā́, sahasradhā́, and so on. Also,
naturally, from words having a quasi-numeral character: thus, anekadhā,
katidhā́, tatidhā́, bohudhā́, purudhā́, viśvádhā, śaśvadhā́,
aparimitadhā, yāvaddhā́, etāvaddhā́, māsadhā. In a very few cases,
also from general noun and adjective stems: thus, mitradhā́ (AV.),
priyadhā́ (TS.; predhā́, MS.), ṛjudhā́ (TB.), urudhā and citradhā
(BhP.) ; and from one adverb, bahirdhā́.
b. The particle ádha or ádhā, a Vedic equivalent of átha, probably
belongs here (purudhá and viśvádha, with shortened final, occur a few
times in RV.); also addhā́ in truth; and perhaps sahá with, which has
an equivalent sadha- in several Vedic compounds. And the other adverbs
in ha (1100a) may be of like origin.
1105. From a few numerals are made multiplicative adverbs with s:
namely, dvís, tris, and catúr (probably, for caturs): 489 a.
a. The corresponding word for once, sakṛ́t, is a compound rather
than a derivative; and the same character belongs still more evidently to
pañcakṛ́tvas, navakṛ́tvas, aparimitakṛ́tvas, etc., though kṛt and
kṛtvas are regarded by the native grammarians as suffixes; the earlier
407 ADVERB S B Y DERIVATION . [—1109
texts (AV. ŚB. MS.) have saptá kṛ́tvas, dáśa kṛ́tvas, dvā́daśa kṛ́tvas,
aṣṭā́v evá kṛ́tvas, etc. AB. has the redundant combination triṣ kṛtvaḥ.
b. The quasi-sufflx dyus, from a case-form of div day, is in a
similar manner added to various determining words, generally made to end
in e: e. g. anyedyús another day, ubhayedyus(AV. -yadyús) on either
day, pūrvedyús the day before.
1106. By the suffix śás are made, especially from numeral or
quantitative stems, many adverbs of quantity or measure or manner,
generally used distributively.
a. Examples are : ekaśás one by one, śataśás by hundreds, ṛtuśás
season by season, pacchas foot by foot, akṣaraśás syllable by syllable,
gaṇaśás in crowds, stambaśás by bunches, paruśśás limb by limb,
tāvacchás in such and such number or quantity: and, in a more general
way, sarvaśás wholly, mukhyaśas principally, kṛchraśas stingily,
manmaśás as minded.
1107. By the suffix vát are made with great freedom, in every
period of the language, adverbs signifying after the manner of, like, etc.
a. Thus, aṅgirasvát like Angiras, manuṣvát (RV.) as Aianu did,
jamadagnivát after the manner of Jamadagni ,• pūrvavát or pratnavát
or purāṇavát, as of old, kākatālīyavat after the fashion of the crow
and the palm-fruit.
b. This is really the adverbially used accusative (with adverbial
shift of accent: below, 1111 g) of the suffix vant (1233f), which in the
Veda makes certain adjective compounds of a similar meaning: thus, tvā́¬
vantlike thee, mā́vant of my sort, etc.
1108. By the suffix sat are made from nouns quasi-adverbs signifying in or into the condition or the possession of what is indicated by the
noun; they are used only with verbs of being, of becoming, and of making:
namely, oftenest kṛ and bhū, but also as, gam, yā, and nī (and, according to the grammarians, sam-pad). Some twenty-five examples are quotable from the later literature; but none from the earlier, which also
appears to contain nothing that castslight upon the origin of the formation.
The s of sāt is not liable to conversion into ṣ. The connection with the
verb is not so close as to require the use of the gerund in ya instead of
that in tvā (990); and other words are sometimes interposed between the
adverb and verb.
a. Examples are: sarvakarmāṇi bhasmasāt kurute (MBh.)
reduces all deeds to ashes; loko 'yam dasyusād bhaved (MBh.) this world
would become a prey to barbarians; yasya brāhmaṇasāt sarvaṁ vittam
āsīt (MBh.) whose whole property was given to Brahmans; niyataṁ bhas¬
masād yāti (Har.) it is inevitably reduced to ashes; agnīn ātmasāt
kṛtvā (Y.) having taken the /ires to one's self.
1109. a. Suffixes, not of noun-derivation or of inflection, may be
traced with more or less plausibility in a few other adverbs. Thus, for
1109—] XVI . INDECLINABLES . 408
example, in prātár early, and sanutár away; in dakṣiṇít with right hand,
and cikitvít with consideration ; in nūnám now, and nānānám variously.
But the cases are in the main too rare and doubtful to be worth notice here.
b. In the epics begin to be found a small class (about a dozen are
quotable) of adverbs having the form of a repeated noun-stem with its first
occurrence ending in ā and its second in i : e. g. hastāhasti hand to
hand, rathārathi chariot against chariot, karṇākarṇi ear to ear.
c. The adverbs thus far described are almost never used pre¬
positionally. Those of the next division, however, are in many instances so used.
1110. Case-forms used as Adverbs. A large number of adverbs are more or less evidently cases in form,
made from stems which are not otherwise in use. Also
many cases of known stems, pronominal or noun or adjective, are used with an adverbial value, being distinguished
from proper cases by some difference of application, which
is sometimes accompanied by an irregularity of form.
1111. The accusative is the case most frequently and widely
used adverbially. Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, yád if, when, that, etc.; tád then etc.;
kim why, whether, etc.; idám now, here; adás yonder; and so on. Of
like value, apparently, are the (mostly Vedic) particles kád‚ kam and
kam(?), id, cid (common at every period), smád and sumád, īmand
sīm (by some regarded as still possessing pronoun-value), -kīm. Compounds with id are céd if, néd lest, éd,svid, kuvíd; with cid, kū́cid;
with -kīm, nákīm and mā́kīm, and ā́kīm.
b. Of noun-stems: as, nā́ma by name; sukham happily; kā́mam
at will, if you please; náktam by night; ráhas secretly; oṣám quickly
(V.); and so on.
c. Of adjective stems, in unlimited numbers: as, satyám truly;
cirám long; pū́rvam formerly; nityam constantly; bhū́yas more, again;
viśrabdham confidently; prakāśam openly; and so on.
d. The neuter singular isthe case commonly employed in this way;
and it is so used especially as made from great numbers of compound adjective stems, often from such as hardly occur, or are not at all found,
in adjective use. Certain of these adverbial compounds, having an indeclinable as prior member, are made by the Hindu grammarians a special class
of compounds, called avyayībhāva (1313).
e. But the feminine singular also is sometimes used, especially in
the so-caUed adverbial endings of comparison, tarām and tamām, which
are attached to particles (cf. 1119), and even (473c) to verb-forms:
409 CASE-FORM S AS ADVERBS . [—1112
e. g. natarā́m, kathaṁtarām, uccaistarā́m, śanāistarām, jyokta¬
mā́m. In the oldest language (RV. and AV.), the neuter instead of the
feminine form of these suffixes is almost alone in use: see 1119.
f. Many adverbs of obscure form or connection are to be explained
with probability as accusatives of obsolete noun or adjective stems : examples
are tūṣṇī́m in silence; sāyám at evening; sākám together, with (prep.);
áram or álam sufficient (in the later language used with √kṛ in the manner
of a prefix: 1078a); prāyas usually; īṣát somewhat; amnás unexpectedly; bahis outside; mithu and mithás, múhu and múhus, jā́tu,
and so on. Madrik etc., and niṇík (in RV.), are perhaps contracted
forms of adjectives having √ac or añc as their final (407 ff.). The presence of other roots as final members is also probable for uśádhak, ānu¬
ṣák and āyuṣák, anuṣṭhú and suṣṭhú, yugapát, etc. Compare also
the forms in am beside those in ā, above, 1101 a, 1102e, 1103 b.
g. In (Vedic) dravát quickly is to be seen a change of accent for
the adverbial use (pple drávant running); and drahyát stoutly (RV.,
once) may be another example. The comparative and superlative suffixes
(above, e) show a like change; and it is also to be recognized in the derivatives with vát (1107).
1112. The instrumental is also often used with adverbial
value: generally in the singular, but sometimes also in the plural.
Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, enā́ and ayā́, káyā, ana, ama, amuyā́.
b. Of noun-stems: as, kṣaṇena instantly; aśeṣeṇa completely;
viśeṣeṇa especially; diva by day; diṣṭyā fortunately; sáhasā suddenly;
aktubhis by night; and so on.
c. Of adjectives, both neuter (not distinguishable from masculine) and
feminine: as, akhilena wholly; prāyeṇa mostly; dákṣiṇena to the south;
úttareṇa to the north; ántareṇa within; ciréṇa long; — śánāis and
śánakāis slowly; uccāís on high; nīcāis below; parācāís afar;
táviṣībhis mightily; and so on.
d. More doubtful cases, mostly from the older language, may be instanced as follows: tiraścátā, devátā, bāhúta, and sasvártā (all RV.),
homonymous instrumentals from nouns in tā; dvita, tādītnā, īrmā́,
mṛṣā́, vṛ́thā, sácā, asthā́ (?), mudhā (not V.), adhunā́ (B. and later).
e. Adverbially used instrumentals are (in the older language), oftener
than any other case, distinguished from normal instrumentals by differences
of form: thus, especially, by an irregular accent: as, ama and diva
(given above); perhaps gúhā; apākā́, āsayā́, kuhayā́ (?); naktayā́,
svapnayā́, samanā́; adatrayā́, ṛtayā́, ubhayā́, sumnayā́ (P); dak¬
siṇā́, madhyā́; nīcā́, prācā́, uccā́, paścā́, tiraścā́; vasántā; — in
a few u-stems, by a y inserted before the ending, which is accented: thus,
amuyā́ (given above), āśuyā́, sādhuyā́, raghuyā́, dhṛṣṇuyā́, anuṣ-
1112—] XYI. INDECLINABLES. 410
ṭhuyā́, mithuyā́; — and urviyā́ (for urvyā́) and víśvyā (properly
víśvayā) are more slightly irregular.
1113. The dative has only very seldom an adverbial use.
a. Examples are aparā́ya for the future (RV.; with changed accent) ; cirāya long; arthāya for the sake of; ahnāya presently.
1114. The ablative is not infrequently used adverbially.
Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, kásmāt why? akasmāt casually, unexpectedly ; ā́t‚ tā́t, yā́t (V.: normal forms ‚ instead of the pronominal
asmāt etc.).
b. Of noun-stems: as, āsā́t near; ārā́t afar; balāt forcibly; kutū¬
halāt emulously; sakāśāt on the part of.
c. Oftenest, of adjective stems: as, dūrā́tafar; nīcā́t below; paścā́t
behind; sākṣā́t plainly, actually; samantāt completely; acirāt not long;
pratyakṣatamāt (AB.) most obviously; pratyantāt (S.) to the end.
d. In a few instances, adverbially used ablatives likewise show a
changed accent in the early language: thus, apākā́t from afar; amā́t from
near by; sanā́t from of old (but instr. sánā); uttarā́t from the north;
adharā́t below.
1115. The genitive is almost never used adverbially.
a. In the older language occur aktós by night, and vástos by day;
later, cirasya long.
1116. The locative is sometimes used with adverbial value.
Thus:
a. From noun and adjective stems: āké near; āré and dūré afar;
abhisvaré behind; astamīké at home; rté without (prep.); ágre in front;
sthāne suitably; sapadi immediately; -arthe and -kṛte (common in composition) for the sake of; aparī́ṣu in after time; ādāu first; rahasi
in secret.
1117. Even a nominative form appears to be stereotyped into an adverbial value in (Vedic) kis, interrogative particle, and its compounds
nákis and mā́kis, negative particles. And masc. nominatives""from añcstems (as parāṅ AB., nyaṅ Āpast.) are sometimes found used by substitution for neuters.
1118. Verba l Prefixe s and kindre d words. The
verbal prefixes, described in the preceding chapter (1076 ff.),
are properly adverbs, having a special office and mode of
use in connection with verbal roots and their more immediate derivatives.
a. Their occasional looser connection with the verb has been
noticed above (1084). In the value of general adverbs, however,
411 ADVERBIAL PREFIXES. [—1121
they only rarely occur (except as ápi has mainly changed its office
from prefix to adverb or conjunction in the later language); but their
prepositional uses are much more frequent and important: see below,
1125 b.
b. In composition with nouns, they (like other adverbial elements)
not infrequently have an adjective value: see below, 1281 ff., 1305.
1119. Several of the prefixes (as noticed above, 473—4) form comparative and superlative adjectives, by the suffixes tara and tama, or ra
and ma: thus, uttara and uttamá, ádhara and adhamá, ápara and
apamá, ávara and avamá, úpara and upamá, and prathamá is
doubtless of the same character; also, ántara and ántama. And accusatives of such derivative adjectives (for the most part not otherwise found in
use) have the value of comparatives, and rarely superlatives, to the prefixes
themselves: thus, sáṁśitaṁ cit saṁtaráṁ sáṁ śiśādhi(AV.)whatever
is quickened do thou still further quicken; vitaráṁ vi kramasva (RV.)
stride out yet more widely ,• prá táṁ naya prataráṁ vásyo ácha (RV.)
lead him forward still further toward advantage; úd enam uttaráṁ naya
(AV.) lead him up still higher.
a. Besides those instanced, are found also nitarám, apatarám, abhi¬
tarám, avatarám, parātarám, par as tar am. In the Brāhmaṇas and
later (above, 1111 e), the feminine accusative is used instead: thus, ati¬
tarā́m and atitamām, abhitarā́m, onutamā́m, ātamā́m, pratitarā́m,
nitaram, uttarā́m, pratarā́m and pratamā́m, vitaram, saṁtorā́m
(also RV., once).
1120. Kindred in origin and character with the verbal prefixes, and used like them except in composition with verbs, are a
few other adverbs: thus, avás down; adhás below (and adhastarā́m);
parás far off (and parastarā́m); purā́ before; antarā́ (apparently,
antár + ā́) among, between; anti near; upári above; and sahá (already
mentioned, 1104 b) along, with, and sácā together, with, may be noticed
with them. Vina without, and viṣu- apart, appear to be related
with vi.
1121. Inseparable Prefixes. A small number of
adverbial prefixes are found only in combination with other
elements. Thus:
a. The negative prefix a or an — an before vowels, a before
consonants.
b. It is combined especially with innumerable nouns and adjectives;
much more rarely, with adverbs, as akutra and ápunar (RV.), áneva
(AV.), ánadhas (TB.), akasmāt, asakṛt; in rare cases, also with pronouns (as atad, akiṁcit); and even, in the later language, now and then
with verbs, as aspṛhayanti (BhP. Śiś.) they do not desire, alokayati
(SD.) he dots not view. Now and then it is prefixed to itself: e. g. ana¬
kāmamāra, anaviprayukta, anavadya(P).
1121—] XVI. INDECLINABLES. 412
c. In a very few cases, the negative a appears to be made long:
thus, ā́sat non-ea?istent‚ ā́deva godless, ā́rāti enemy, āśāuca impurity,
ā́tura Ulf?).
d. The independent negative adverbs, ná and mā́, are only in exceptional instances used in composition: see below, 1122e.
e. The comitative prefix sa, used instead of the preposition sám,
and interchangeably with sahá, before nouns and adjectives.
f. The prefix of dispraise dus ill, badly (identical with √duṣ:
225 a).
g. It is combined in the same manner as a or an. Of combinations
with a verbal form, at least a single example appears to be quotable:
duścaranti (R.) behave ill.
h. The corresponding laudatory prefix su well is in general so
closely accordant in its use with the preceding that it is best mentioned here, though it occurs not rarely as an independent particle
in the oldest language (in RV., more than two hundred times; in the
peculiar parts of AV., only fourteen times), and even occasionally
later.
I. The particle su sometimes appears in B. and later before a verbform, and considering its rapid loss of independent use in V‚, and the
analogy of a and dus (above, b‚ g) it is probably at least in part to be
regarded as in composition with the verb. The pada-text of AV. xix. 49.
10 reads su-ápāyati, but its testimony is of little or no value. K. has
na su vijñāyete and na vāi su viduḥ, and KeU. has su veda; TB.
has susámbodháyati(P); MBh. and BhP. have sūpatasthe; R. has su¬
śakyante.
j . The exclamatory and usually depreciative prefixed forms of the
interrogative pronoun (506) are most analogous with the inseparable
prefixes.
1122. Miscellaneous Adverbs. Other words of adverbial character and office, not clearly referable to any of
the classes hitherto treated, may be mentioned as follows:
a. Asseverative particles (in part, only in the older language):
thus, oṅgá, hánta, kíla, khálu, tu (rare in older language), vāí, vā́vá
(in Brāhmaṇa language only), hi, hiná, u, áha, ha, gha, samaha,
sma, bhala.
b. Of these, hánta is a word of assent and incitement; hi has won
also an illative meaning, and accents the verb with which it stands in
connection (595 e); sma sometimes appears to give a past meaning to a
present tense (778 b); u is often combined with the final a of other particles: thus, átho, nó, mó, utó, úpo, pro; but also with that of verbforms, as dattó, vidmó. The final o thus produced is pragṛhya or un¬
combinable (188 c). Particles of kindred value, already mentioned above,
413 ADVERBS . [—1122
are id, kam or kam, cid, jā́tu, evá. Some of the asseverative particles
are much used in the later artificial poetry with a purely expletive value,
as devices to help make out the metre (pādapūraṇa verse-fillers); so especially ha, hi, tu, sma.
c Negative particles are: ná, signifying simple negation; mā́,
signifying prohibition.
d. As to the construction of the verb with mā́, see above, 579. In
the Veda, nú (or nū́: 248a) has also sometimes a negative meaning.
For the Vedic ná of comparison, see below, g, h.
e. In nahí, ná is combined with hi, both elements retaining their
full meaning; also with id in néd lest. It is perhaps present in nanú
and caná, but not in hiná (RV., once). In general, neither ná nor ma
is used in composition to make negative compounds, but, instead, the inseparable negative prefix a or an (1121a): exceptions are the Vedic particles nákis and mā́kis, nákīm and mā́kīm; also naciram and mā¬
ciram, napuṃsaka, and, in the later language, a number of others.
f. Interrogative particles are only those already given: kád, kim,
kuvíd, svid, nanú, of which the last introduces an objection or expostulation.
g. Of particles of comparison have been mentioned the toneless
iva, and yathā (also toneless when used in the same way). Of frequent occurrence in the oldest language is also ná, having (without
loss of accent) the same position and value as the preceding.
h. Examples of the ná of comparison are: ṛṣidvíṣa íṣuṁ ná sṛjata
dvíṣam (RV.) let loose your enmity like an arrow at the enemy of the singer;
váyo ná vṛkṣám (AV.) as birds to the tree; gāuró ná tṛṣitáḥ piba
(RV.) drink like a thirsty buffalo. This use is generally explained as being
a modification or adaptation of the negative one: thus, [although, to be
sure] not [precisely] a thirsty buffalo; and so on.
i. Of particles of place, besides those already mentioned, may
be noticed kvà where? (in V., always to be read kúa).
j. Particles of time are- nú now (also nū́: nūnám was mentioned above, 1109 a), adyá and sadyás and sadívas (RV., once) today,
at once (all held to contain the element div or dyu), hyás yesterday,
śvás tomorrow, jyók (also related with dyu) long; púnar again.
k. Of particles of manner, besides those already mentioned,
may be noticed nā́nā variously (for nānānám, its derivative, see
1109a); sasvár (RV.) secretly.
I. In the above classifications are included all the Vedic adverbial
words, and most of those of the later language: for the rest, see the dictionaries.
1123-] X Y L INDECLINABLES . 414
Prepositions.
1123. There is, as already stated, no proper class of
prepositions (in the modern sense of that term), no body of
words having for their prevailing office the "government"
of nouns. But many of the adverbial words indicated above
are used with nouns in a way which approximates them
to the more fully developed prepositions of other languages.
a. If one and another of such words — as vinā, ṛte — occurs almost
solely in prepositional use, this is merely fortuitous and unessential.
1124. Words are thus used prepositionally along with all the
noun-cases excepting the dative. But in general their office is directive only, determining more definitely, or strengthening, the proper
case-use of the noun. Sometimes, however, the case-use is not easy
to trace, and the noun then seems to be more immediately "governed"
by the preposition — that is, to have its case-form more arbitrarily
determined by its association with the latter. This is oftenest true
of the accusative; and also of the genitive, which has, here as elsewhere (294 b), suffered an extension of its normal sphere of use.
1125. a. The adverbs by derivative form (1097ff.)have least
of a prepositional value (exceptions are especially a few made with
the suffix tas: 1098).
b. Most of the verbal prefixes (exceptions are ud, ni, parā, pra;
and ava and vi are almost such) have their prepositional or quasiprepositional uses with cases; but much more widely in the older
time than in the later: in the classical language the usage is mainly
restricted to prati, anu, and ā.
c. Most of the directive words akin with the more proper prefixes are used prepositionally: some of them — as saha, vinā, upari,
antarā, purā — freely, earlier and later.
d. The case-forms used adverbially are in many instances used
prepositionally also: oftenest, as was to be expected, with the genitive; but frequently, and from an early time, with the accusative;
more rarely with other cases.
e. We will take up now the cases for a brief exposition, beginning
with those that are least freely used.
1126. The Locative. This case is least of all used with words
that can claim the name of preposition. Of directives, antár and its later
derivative antarā́, meaning within, in, are oftenest added to it, and in the
classical language as well as earlier. Of frequent Vedic use with it are a
and ádhi: thus, mártyeṣv ā́among mortals; pṛthivyā́m ádhy óṣadhīh
the plants upon the earth; téjo máyi dhārayā́ 'dhi (AV.) establish glory
415 PREPOSITIONS. [—1129
in me; — ápi and úpa are much rarer: thus, yā́ apā́m ápi vraté [sánti]
(RV.) who are in the domain of the waters; amū́r yā́ úpa sū́rye [sánti]
(RV.) who are up yonder in the sun; — sácā along with is not rare in
RV., but almost entirely unknown later: thus, pitróḥ sácā satī́ staying
with her parents.
1127. The Instrumental. The directives used with this case are
almost only those which contain the associative pronominal root sa: as sohá
(most frequent), sākám, sārdhám, samám, samáyā, sarátham; and, in
theVeda, the prefix sám: as, te sumatíbhiḥ sám pátnībhir ná vṛ́ṣaṇo
nasīmahi (RV.) may we be united with thy favors as men with their spouses.
By substitution of the instrumental for the ablative of separation (283 a),
vinā without (not Vedic) takes sometimes the instrumental; and so, in
the Veda, avás down and parás beyond, with which the ablative is also,
and much more normally, construed. And ádhi, in RV., is used with the
instrumentals snúnā and snúbhis, where the locative would be expected.
1128* The Ablative . In the prepositional constructions of the ablative (as was pointed out and partly illustrated above, 293), the ablative
value of the case, and the merely directive value of the added particle, are
for the most part clearly to be traced. Many of the verbal prefixes are
more or less frequently joined in the older language with this case: often¬
est‚ ádhi and pari; more sporadically, ánu‚ ápa, áva, práti, and the
separatives nis and vi. The change of meaning of the ablative with ā́
hither, by which it comes to fill the office of its opposite, the accusative,
was sufficiently explained above (293 c). Of directive words akin with
the prefixes, many — as bahís, purás, avás, adhás, parás, purā́, vinā,
and tirás out of knowledge of — accompany this case by a perfectly regular
construction. Also the case-forms arvā́k, prā́k, paścā́t, ūrdhvám,
pū́rvam, páram, and ṛté without, of which the natural construction with
an ablative is predominant earlier.
1129. The Accusative . Many of the verbal prefixes and related
words take an accompanying accusative. Most naturally (since the accusative is essentially the to-case), those that express a motion or action toward anything: as abhi, práti, ánu, úpa, ā́, áti and ádhi in the sense of
over on to, or across, beyond, tirás through, antár and antara when meaning between, pari around. Examples are: yā́h pradíśo abhi sū́ryo
vicáṣṭe (AV.) what quarters the sun looks abroad unto; ábodhy agníh
práty āyatī́m uṣā́sam (RV.) Agni has been awakened to meet the advancing dawn; gacchet kadācit svajanam prati (MBh.) she might go
somewhither to her own people; imam prakṣyāmi nṛpatim prati (MBh.)
him I will ask with reference to the king; máma cittám ánu cittébhir
é 'ta (AV.) follow after my mind with your minds; é Tiy ā́ naḥ (AV.)
come hither to us; úpa na é 'ny arvā́ṅ (RV.) come hither unto us; yó
devó mártyāṃ áti (AV.) the god who is beyond mortals; adhiṣṭhā́ya
várcasā́ *dhy anyā́n (AV.) excelling above others in glory. Also abhitas
and paritas, which have a like value with the simple abhi and pari;
1129—] XVI . INDECLINABLES . 416
and upári above (oftener with genitive). Less accordant with ordinary
accusative constructions is the use of this case with adhas, paras, puras,
vinā, beside other cases which seem more suited to the meaning of those
particles. And the same may be said of most of the adverbial case-forms
with which the accusative is used. Thus, a number of instrumentals of
situation or direction: as yé 'vareṇā "dityám, yé páreṇā "dityám
(TB.) those who are below the sun, those who are beyond the sun; ántareṇayónim (ŚB.) within the womb; te hī'dam antareṇa sarvam (AB.) for
all this universe is between them; úttareṇa gā́rhapatyam (ŚB.) to the
north of the householder's fire; dákṣiṇena védim (ŚB.) to the south*of
the sacrificial hearth; dakṣiṇena vṛkṣavāṭikām (Ś.) to the right of the
orchard; nikaṣā́ yamunām (Har.) near the Yamunā. Similarly, ūrdh¬
vam and pūrvam have an accusative object as well as an ablative;
and the same is true later of ṛte. Abhimukham toward has a more
natural right to construction with this case.
1130. The Genitive. The words which are accompanied by the
genitive are mostly case-forms of nouns, or of adjectives used substantively,
retaining enough of the noun-character to take this case as their natural
adjunct. Such are the locatives agre in front of, abhyāśe near, arthe
and kṛte for the sake of, nimitte and hetāu by reason of, madhye in
the midst of; and other cases, as arthāya, kāraṇāt, sakāśāt, hetos. And
really, although less directly and obviously, of the same character are other
adjective cases (some of them showing other constructions, already noticed):
as adhareṇa, uttareṇa and uttarāt, dakṣiṇena and dakṣiṇāt, paścāt,
ūrdhvam, anantaram, samakṣam, sākṣāt. More questionable, and
illustrations rather of the general looseness of use of the genitive, are its
constructions (almost wholly unknown in the oldest language) with more
proper words of direction: thus, with the derivative par itas, paratas,
and antitas, and parastāt and purastāt (these found in the Brāhmaṇa
language: as, saṁvatsarasya paras tat after a year; sūktasya puras¬
tāt before the hymn [AB.]); with anti, adhas, avas, puras; with upari
above (common later); and with antar.
Conjunctions.
1131. The conjunctions, also, as a distinct class of
words, are almost wanting.
a. The combination of clausesisin Sanskritin general of a very
simple character; much of what in other Indo-European languages is
effected by subordinating conjunctionsis here managed by means of
composition of words, by the use of the gerunds (994), of iti (1102),
of abstract nouns in case-forms, and so on.
1132. The relative derivative adverbs, already given
417 CONJUNCTIONS. [—1135
(1098 ff.), may properly be regarded as conjunctions; and a
few other particles of kindred value, as céd and néd (Ulla).
1133. Purely of conjunctive value are ST ca and, and
ôTT vā or (both toneless, and never having the first place
in a sentence or clause).
a. Of copulative value, along with ca, is in the older language
especially utá (later it becomes a particle of more indefinite use); and
ápi, tátas, táthā, kíṁ ca, with other particles and combinations of
particles, are used often as connectives of clauses.
b. Adversative is t u but (rare in the older language); also, less
strongly, u (toneless).
c. Of illative value is hi for (originally, and in great part at
every period, asseverative only): compare above, 1122b.
d. To ca (as well as to its compound céd) belongs occasionally the
meaning if.
e. It is needless to enter into further detail with regard to those uses
which may be not less properly, or more properly, called conjunctive than
adverbial, of the particles already given, under the head of Adverbs.
Interjections.
1134. The utterances which may be classed as interjections are, as in other languages, in part voice-gestures,
in paTt onomatopoeias, and in part mutilations and corruptions of other parts of speech.
1135. a. Of the class of voice-gestures are, for example: ā, hā,
hāhā, ahaha, he, hāí (AV.), ayi, aye, hayé (RV.), aho, báṭ (RV.),
bata (RV.) or vata, and (probably) hiruk and hurúk (RV.).
b. Onomatopoetic or imitative utterances are, for example (in
the older language): ciścā́ whiz (of an arrow. RV.); kikirā́ (palpitation: RV.); bā́l and pháṭ (pháṣ?) or phál splash (AV.); bhúk bowwow (AV.); śál pat (AV.); āṣ, hīṣ, as, and has (PB.); and see the
words already quoted in composition with the roots kṛ and bhū,
above, 1091.
c. Nouns and adjectives which have assumed an interjectional
character are, for example: bhos (for the vocative bhavas, 456); are
or re (voc. of ari enemy); dhik alas! (may be mere voice-gesture, but
perhaps related with √dih); kaṣṭam woe is mel diṣṭyā thank heaven!
svasti hail/ suṣṭhu, sādhu good, excellent! None of these are Vedic
in interjectional use.
1136—] XVII. DERIVATIO N OF DECLINABL E STEMS . 418
CHAPTE R XVII .
DERIVATION OF DECLINABLE STEMS.
1136. TH E formation from roots of conjugable stems — namely,
tense-stems, mode-stems, and stems of secondary conjugation (not
essentially different from one another, nor, it is believed, ultimately
from the formation of declined stems) — was most conveniently treated above, in the chapters devoted to the verb. Likewise the formation of adverbs by derivation (not essentially different from caseformation), in the chapter devoted to particles. And the formation
of those declinable stems — namely, of comparison, and of infinitives
and participles — which attach themselves most closely to the systems of inflection, has also been more or less fully exhibited. But
the extensive and intricate subject of the formation of the great body
of declinable stems was reserved for a special chapter.
a. Of course, only a brief and compendious exhibition of the subject
can be attempted within the here necessary limits: no exhaustive tracing
out of the formative elements of every period ; still less, a complete statement of the varied uses of each element; least of all, a discussion of origins; but enough to help the student in that analysis of words which
must form a part of his labor from the outset, giving a general outline of
the field, and preparing for more penetrating investigation.
b. The material from accented texts, and especially the Vedic material, will be had especially in view (nothing that is Vedic being intentionally left unconsidered); and the examples given will be, so far as is
possible, words found in such texts with their accent marked. No word
not thus vouched for will be accented unless the fact is specifically pointed out,
1137. The roots themselves, both verbal and pronominal, are used in their bare form, or without any added
suffix, as declinable stems.
a. As to this use of verbal roots, see below, 1147.
b. The pronominal roots, so-called, are essentially declinable;
and hence, in their further treatment in derivation, they are throughout in accordance with other declinable stems, and not with verbal
roots.
1138. Apart from this, every such stem is made by a
suffix. And these suffixes fall into two general classes:
419 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SUFFIXES. [—1140
A. Primary suffixes, or those which are added directly
to roots;
B. Secondary suffixes, or those which are added to derivative stems (also to pronominal roots, as just pointed out,
and sometimes to particles).
a. The division of primary suffixes nearly corresponds to the kṛt
(more regular) and uṇādi (less regular)suffixes of the Hindu grammarians;
the secondary, to their taddhita-suffixes.
1139. But this distinction, though one of high value,
theoretically and practically, is not absolute. Thus:
a. Suffixes come to have the aspect and the use of primary
which really contain a secondary element — that is to say, the earliest words exhibiting them were made by addition of secondary
suffixes to words already derivative.
b. Sundry examples of this will be pointed out below: thus, the
gerundival suffixes, tavya, anīya, etc., the suffixes uka and aka, tra,
and others. This origin is probable for more cases than admit of demonstration; and it is assumable for others which show no distinct signs of
composition.
e. Less often, a suffix of primary use passes over in part into
secondary, through the medium of use with denominative "roots" or
otherwise: examples are yu‚ iman, īyas and iṣṭha, ta.
1140. Moreover, primary suffixes are added not only
to more original roots, but, generally with equal freedom,
to elements which have come to wear in the language the
aspect of such, by being made the basis of primary conjugation — and even, to a certain extent, to the bases of
secondary conjugation, the conjugation-stems, and the bases
of tense-inflection, the tense-stems.
a. The most conspicuous examples of this are the participles, present
and future and perfect, which are made alike from tense and conjugationstems of every form. The infinitives (968 ff.) attach themselves only in
sporadic instances to tense-stems, and even from conjugation-stems are made
but sparingly earlier; and the same is true of the gerundives.
b. General adjectives and nouns are somewhat widely made from conjugation-stems, especially from the base of causative conjugation: see below
the suffixes a (1148j‚k), ā (1149 c, d), ana (1150m), as (1151 f),
ani (1159b), u (1178 g—i), ti (1157g), tṛ(1182e), tnu (1196b),
snu (1194b), uka (1180d), āku (1181 d), ālu (1192 b), tu (1161 d).
1140—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 420
c. From tense-stems the examples are far fewer, but not unknown:
thus, from present-stems, occasional derivatives in a (1148 j), ā (1149d‚e),
ana (1150n), i (1155d), u (1178f), ta (1176e), tu (1161 d), uka
(1180d), tra(1185e), ti (1157 g), vin(orin: 1232b, 1183a); from
stems in a s apparently of aoristic character (besides infinitives and gerundives), occasional derivatives in a (1148j), ana (1150j), ani (1159 b),
an (1160 a), ana (1175), as (1151c), ī (1156 b), iṣṭha (1184 a),
u (1178f), us (1154a), tṛ (1182 e), in (1183a),
1141. The primary suffixes are added also to roots as
compounded with the verbal prefixes.
a. Whatever, namely, may have been originally and strictly the
mode of production of the derivatives with prefixes, it is throughout
the recorded life of the language as if the root and its prefix or prefixes constituted a unity, from which a derivative is formed in the
same manner as from the simple root, with that modification of the
radical meaning which appears also in the proper verbal forms as
compounded with the same prefixes.
b. Not derivatives of every kind are thus made; but, in the
main, those classes which have most of the verbal force, or which
are most akin in value with infinitives and participles.
C The occurrence of such derivatives with prefixes, and their accent,
will be noted under each suffix below. They are chiefly (in nearly the
order of their comparative frequency), besides root-stems, those in a, in
ana, in ti, in tar and tra, and in in, ya, van and man, i and u, as,
and a few others.
1142. The suffixes of both classes are sometimes joined to their
primitives by a preceding union-vowel — that is to say, by one which
wears that aspect, and, in our ignorance or uncertainty as to its
real origin, may most conveniently and safely be called by that name.
The line between these vowels and those deserving to be ranked as
of organic suffixal character cannot be sharply drawn.
Each of the two great classes will now be taken up by itself,
for more particular consideration.
A. Primary Derivatives.
1143. Form of root. The form of root to which a
primary suffix is added is liable to more or less variation.
Thus:
a. By far the most frequent is a strengthening change, by guṇaor vṛddhi-increment. The former may occur under all circumstances
(except, of course, where guṇa-change is in general forbidden: 235,
240): thus, véda from √vid, móda from √mud, várdha from √vṛdh;
421 FOR M OF ROOT. [—1145
áyana from √i, sávana from √su, sáraṇa from √sṛ; and so on.
But the latter is only allowed under such circumstances as leave long
ā as the resulting vowel: that is to say, with non-final a‚ and with
a final i- or u-vowel and ṛ before a vowel: thus, nādá from √nad,
grābhá from √gṛbh or grabh, vāhá from √vah, nāyá from √nī,
bhāvá from √bhū, kārá from √kṛ; such strengthening as would
make vāida and māuda does not accompany primary derivation.
b. Strengthening in derivation does not stand in any such evident
connection with accent as strengthening in conjugation; nor can any general rules be laid down as to its occurrence; it has to be pointed out in
detail for each suffix. So also with other vowel-changes, which are in
general accordance with those found in inflection and in the formation of
tense- and mode-stems.
0. The reversion of a final palatal or h to a guttural has been already
noticed (216). A final n or m is occasionally lost, as in formations already
considered.
d. After a short final vowel is sometimes added a t: namely, where
a root is used as stem without suffix (1147d), and before a following y
or v of van (1169), vara and varī (1171), yu once (1165 a), and ya
(1213 a). The presence of t before these suffixes appears to indicate an
original secondary derivation from derivatives in ti and tu.
e. The root is sometimes reduplicated: rarely in the use without
suffix (1147c‚e); oftenest before a (1148k), i (1155e), u (1178d); but
also before other suffixes, as ā (1149e), ana (1150m), vana (1170a),
van and varī (1169d, 1171a,b), vani (1170b), vi (1193), vit
(1193b), ani (1159b), in (1183a), tnu (1196a), ta (1176a), ti
(1157d), tha (1163a), tṛ (1182b), tra (1185f), ūka (1180f), aka
(1181a), īka (1186c), ma (1166b).
1144. Accent. No general laws governing the place of the
accent are to be recognized; each suffix must in this respect be considered by itself.
a. In connection with a very few suffixes is to be recognized a certain degree of tendency to accent the root in case of a nomen actionis or
infinitival derivative, and the ending in the case of a nomen agentis or
participial derivative: see the suffixes a, ana, as, an, and man, below,
where the examples are considered. Differences of accent in words made
by the same suffix are also occasionally connected with differences of gender: see the suffixes as and man.
1145. Meaning. As regards their signification, the primary
derivatives fall in general into two great classes, the one indicating
the action expressed by the verbal root, the other the person or
thing in which the action appears, the agent or actor — the latter,
either substantively or adjectively. The one class is more abstract,
infinitival; the other is more concrete, participial. Other meanings
1145—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 422
may in the main be viewed as modifications or specializations of
these two.
a. Even the words indicating recipience of action, the passive participles, are, as their use also as neuter or reflexive shows, only notably
modified words of agency. The gerundives are, as was pointed out above
(961 ff.), secondary derivatives, originally indicating only concerned with
the action.
1146. But these two classes, in the processes of formation, are
not held sharply apart. There is hardly a suffix by which actionnouns are formed which does not also make agent-nouns or adjectives ; although there are not a few by which are made only the latter.
In treating them in detail below, we will first take up the suffixes
by which derivatives of both classes are made, and then those forming only agent-nouns.
a. To facilitate the finding of the different suffixes is given the
following list of them, in their order as treated, with references to paragraphs:
a
ā
ana
as
tas‚ nas, sas
is
us
i
Ī
ti
ni
ani
an
tu
nu
tha
thu
1147
1148
1149
1150
1151
1152
1153
1154
1155
1156
1157
1158
1159
1160
1161
1162
1163
1164
yu
ma
mi
man
van
vana, -ni, -nu
vara
ant
vāṃs
māna
ana
ta
na, ina, una
u
ū
uka
aka
tr or tar
1165
1166
1167
1168
1169
1170
1171
1172
1173
1174
1175
1176
1177
1178
1179
1180
1181
1182
in
īyas, iṣṭha
tra
ka
ya
ra
la
va
ri
ru
vi
snu
sna
tnu
sa
asi
abha
sundries
1183
1184
1185
1186
1187
1188
1189
1190
1191
1192
1193
1194
1195
1196
1197
1198
1199
1200—1
1147. Stems without suffix; Root-words. These
words and their uses have been already pretty fully considered above (323, 348 ff, 383 ff., 400, 401).
a. They are used especially (in the later language, almost
solely) as finals of compounds, and have both fundamental values,
as action-nouns (frequently as infinitives: 971), and as agent-nouns
and adjectives (often governing an accusative: 271 e). As actionnouns, they are chiefly feminines (384: in many instances, however,
they do not occur in situations that determine the gender).
423 ROOT-STEMS ; STEM S I N a. [—1148
b. In a small number of words, mostly of rare occurrence, the
reduplicated root is used without suffix.
c The Vedic cases are: with simple reduplication, sasyád, cikít,
dadṛ́h, didyú and didyút, juhū́, and perhaps gáṅgā and śíśu; with
intensive reduplication, -nenī́, malimluc, yavīyúdh, and jógū and
vánīvan (with the intensive instead of the usual radical accent). In
dáridra is seen a transfer to the a-declension. Asūsū́ is probably to be
understood as a compound, asū-sū́.
d. If the root end in a short vowel, a t isregularly and usually
added (383f-h).
e. Examples have been given at the place just quoted. In jágat the
t is added to the mutilated form of √gam reduplicated, and ṛṇayā́t
(TS., once) appears to put it after a long vowel. In a single instance,
śrútkarṇa (RV.) of listening ears, a stem of this class occurs as prior
member of a compound.
f. Words of this form in combination with verbal prefixes are
very numerous.. The accent rests (as in combination of the same with
other preceding elements) on the root-stem.
g. A few exceptions in point of accent occur: thus, ávasā, úpastut;
and, with other irregularities of form, párijri, upástha, uparístha.
1148. 5% a. With the suffix 5f a is made an immensely
large and heterogeneous body of derivatives, of various
meaning and showing various treatment of the root: guṇastrengthening, vṛddhi-strengthening, retention unchanged,
and reduplication.
In good part, they are classifiable under the two usual general
heads; but in part they have-been individualized into more special
senses.
1. a. With guṇa-strengthening of the root (where that is possible: 235, 240). These are the great majority, being more than
twice as numerous as all others together.
b. Many nomina actionis: as, śráma weariness, gráha seizure, áya
movement, véda knowledge, háva call, kródha wrath, jóṣa enjoyment, "
tára crossing, sárga emission.
c. Many nomina agentis: as, kṣamá patient, svajá constrictor, jīvá
living, meghá cloud, codá inciting, plavá boat, sará brook, sarpá serpent, bhojá generous, khādá devouring.
d. Of the examples here given, those under b accent the radical syllable, and those under c the ending. And this is in perhaps a majority
of cases the fact as regards the two classes of derivatives; so that, taken
in connection with kindred facts as to other suffixes, it hints at such a
difference of accent as a general tendency of the language. A few sporadic
1148—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 424
instances are met with of the same form having the one or the other value
according to its accent: thus, éṣa haste, eṣá hasting; śā́sa order, śās á
orderer (other examples are coda, śāka , śoka : compare a similar difference with other derivatives in as, ana, an, man). But exceptions are
numerous — thus, for example, jayá, javá , smará , action-nouns; śráva ,
mógha , stáva , agent-nouns — and the subject calls for a much wider
and deeper investigation than it has yet received, before the accentuation
referred to can be set up as a law of the language in derivation.
2. e. With vṛddhi-strengthening of the root — but only where
ā is the resulting radical vowel: that is, of medial a, and of final ṛ
(most often), u or ū, i or ī (rare).
f. Examples of action-nouns are: kama love, bhāg á share, nād á
noise, dāv á /ire, tār á crossing. Very few forms of clear derivation and
meaning are quotable with accent on the root-syllable.
g. Examples of agent-nouns are: grābh á seizing, vāh á carrying,
nāy á leading, jār á lover.
3. h. With unstrengthened root, the examples are few: e. g. kṛś á
lean, tur á rapid, yug á yoke, sruv á spoon, priy á dear, v r á troop, śuc á
bright.
i . A number of words of this class, especially as occurring in composition, are doubtless results of the transfer of root-stems to the a-declension: e. g. -ghuṣa, -sphura, -tuda, -dṛśa, -vida, -kira.
j . A few a-stems are made, especially in the older language, from conjugation-stems, mostly causative: thus, -āmaya, ilaya, -īṅkhaya, -ejaya,
-dhāraya , -pāraya , -mṛḍaya, -śamaya (compare the ā-stems, 1149 6,d);
also desiderative, as bībhats a (compare 1038). Occasional examples also
occur from tense-stems: thus, from nu-stems, or secondary stems made
from such, hinvá , -inva, -jinva, -pinva, -sinva, -sunva, -aśnuva ;
from others, -pṛṇa, -mṛṇa, -stṛṇa, -puna, -jāna, -paśya , -manya,
-dasya, -jurya, -kṣudhya, -sya, -tiṣṭha, -jighra, -piba; from futurestems, kariṣya (JB.), janiṣya, bhaviṣya, ruciṣya (?); apparently from
aorist-stems, jeṣá, néṣa-, parṣá, pṛkṣ á (?), -hoṣa.
4. k. Derivatives in a from a reduplicated root-form are a considerable class, mostly occurring in the older language. They are sometimes
made with a simple reduplication: thus, cacará , cikita , dṛdhrá , dadhṛṣá,
babhasa, -babhra, vavrá , śiśayá , śiśnáth a (an action-noun), sasrá ;
but oftener with an intensive reduplication: thus, merely strengthened,
cākṣmá , -cācala, jāgara , nānada , lālasa, vīvadh á (?), -memiṣa,
rerih á and leliha, vevijá, nonuva, momughá , -roruda, lolupa ; with
consonant added, -caṅkaśa-, -caùkrama, jaùgama, cañcala, -jañ¬
japa, dandhvana, -nannama, -jarjalpa, jarjara, -tartura, -dardira,
múrmura , gadgada; dissyllabic, -karikra , kanikradá , carācar á and
calācalá, marīmṛśá , malimlucá , varīvṛtá , sarīsṛpá , paniṣpadá,
saniṣyadá, sanisBasá, patāpata , madāmada , -vadāvada , ghanā -
425 STEM S I N a, a. [—1149
ghaná. Many of these are to be regarded as from an intensive conjugationstem; but some of them show a form not met with in intensive conjugation.
5. I. Derivatives with this suffix from roots as compounded with
the verbal prefixes are quite common, in all the modes of formation
(in each, in proportion to the frequency of independent words): constituting, in fact, considerably the largest body of derivative stems
with prefixes. They are of both classes as to meaning. The accent
is, with few exceptions, on the ending — and that, without any reference to the value of the stem as action-noun or agent-noun.
m. Examples are: saṁgamá assembly, nimeṣà wink, abhidrohá
enmity, anukará assistance, udāná inspiration, pratyāśrāvá response;
— paricará wandering, saṁjayá victorious, vibodhá wakeful, atiyājá
over-pious, udārá inciting, elevated, uttudá rousing, saṁgirá fallowing,
ādardirá crushing, adhicañkramá climbing,
n. The only definite class of exceptions in regard to accent appears
to be that of the adverbial gerunds in am (above, 995), which are accented on the root-syllable. A very few other stems have the same tone: for
example, utpata portent, āśréṣa plague. A few others, mostly agentnouns, have the accent on the prefix: for example, vyôṣa (i. e. ví-oṣa)
burning, prátiveśa neighbor, ā́bhaga sharing; but also sáṁkāśa appearance.
o. For the remaining compounds of these derivatives, with the inseparable prefixes and with other elements, see the next chapter. It may
be merely mentioned here that such compounds aTe numerous, and that
the^ a-derivative has often an active participial value, and is frequently
preceded by a case-form, oftenest the accusative.
p. Many words in the language appear to end with a suffix a, while
yet they are referable to no root which can be otherwise demonstrated
as such.
1149. Eft ā. The vast majority of stems in m ā are
feminine adjectives, corresponding to masculines and neuters
in 35T a (332, 334). But also many suffixes ending in % a
have corresponding feminine forms in long -~í ä, making a
greater or less number of action-nouns. These will be
given under the different suffixes below.
a. There is further, however, a considerable body of feminine
action-nouns made by adding ā to a root, and having an independent
aspect; though they are doubtless in part transfers from the rootnoun (1147). Usually they show an unstrengthened form of root, and
(such as occur in accented texts) an accented suffix.
1149-] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 426
b. Examples are īśā́ lordship, krīḍā́ play, dayā́ pity, nindā́reproach,
śaṅkā́ doubt, hiṃsā injury, kṣamā patience, kṣudhā hunger, bhāṣā
speech, sevā service, spṛhā eagerness.
c. But especially, such nouns in ā are made in large numbers,
and with perfect freedom, from secondary conjugation-stems.
d. Thus, especially from desiderative stems, as jigīṣā́, bhikṣā́,
vīrtsā́, bībhatsā́, etc. (see 1038); in the formation of periphrastic
perfects, especially from causative stems, but also from desiderative and
intensive, and even from primary present-stems (1071c—f); from denominative stems, in the older language, as aśvayā́, sukratūyā́, apasyā́, uru¬
ṣyā́, asūyā́, aśanaya, jīvanasyā́, etc., and quite rarely in the later,
as mṛgayā.
e. The only example from a reduplicated stem is the late paspaśā;
for sūṣā́, jáṅghā, and jihvā́, 'which have a reduplicated aspect, are of
doubtful origin. From present-stems come icchā and probably -ṛcchā.
1150. 5Rana. With this suffix (as with 5f a) are formed innumerable derivatives, of both the principal classes of
meaning, and with not infrequent specializations. The root
has oftenest guṇa-strengthening, but not seldom vṛddhi
instead; and in a few cases it remains unstrengthened.
Derivatives of this formation are frequent from roots with
prefixes, and also in composition with other elements.
a* The normal and greatly prevalent accent is upon the rootsyllable, without regard to the difference of meaning; but cases occur
of accented final, and a few of accented penult. The action-nouns
are in general of the neuter gender. The feminine of adjectives is
made either in ā or in ī (for details, see below). And a few feminine
action-nouns in anā and anī occur, which may be ranked as belonging to this suffix.
1. b. With strengthened and accented root-syllable. Under this
head fall, as above indicated, the great mass of forms.
c. With guṇa-strengthening: examples of action-nouns are sádana
seat, rákṣaṇa protection, dā́na giving, coyana collection, védana property, hávana call, bhójana enjoyment, káraṇa deed, várdhana increase;
— of agent-nouns, tápana burning, cétana visible, códana impelling.
d. With vṛddhi-strengthening (only in such circumstances that ā
remains as vowel of the radical syllable): examples are -cā́tana, naśana,
mā́dana, -vā́cana, -vasana, -vā́hana, sā́dana, -spā́śana, svadana,
-ā́yana, -yā́vana, -srāvaṇa, -páraṇa.
e. From roots with prefixes, the derivatives of this formation are
very numerous, being exceeded in frequency only by those made with the
427 STEM S I N ā, ana. [—1150
suffix a (above, 11481, m). A few examples are: ākrámaṇa striding
on, udyā́na upgoing, nidhā́na receptacle, prā́ṇana expiration, vimócana
release and releasing, saṁgámana assembly and assembler, adhivikártana
cutting off, avaprabhráṃśona falling away down. For other compounds
of these derivatives, showing the same accent (and the same feminine
stem), see the next chapter (below, 1271). A few exceptions occur:
vicakṣaṇá, upariśayaná, and the feminines pramandanī́andnirdahaní.
f. The adjectives of this formation, simple or compound, make their
feminine usually in ī: thus, códanī, péśanī, spáraṇī, jámbhanī;
prajñā́nī, prókṣaṇī, saṁgráhaṇī, abhiṣávaṇī, vidháraṇī (cetanī́
is of doubtful meaning: below, i). An adjective compound, however,
having a noun in ana as final member, makes its feminine in a: thus,
sūpasarpaṇā́ of easy approach, ṣáḍvidhānā of sextuple order, anapavā¬
canā́not to be ordered away,
2. The more irregular formations may be classed as follows:
g. With accent on the final: a number of agent-nouns and adjectives,
as karaṇá active (against káraṇa act), kṛpaṇá miserable (against kṛpáṇa
misery), tvaraṇá hasting, rocaná shining, krośaná yelling, svaponá
sleepy, kṣayaṇá habitable.
h. These, unlike the preceding class, make their feminine in ā: e.
g. tvaraṇa, spandana. A few feminine action-nouns in the older language have the same form: thus, aśanā́, asanā́, mananā́, dyotanā́,
rodhanā́, śvetanā́, hasanā́ (and compare kapanā́, raśanā́); those of
the later language in anā (rather numerous) are doubtful as regards accent.
i. Beside these may be mentioned a few feminines in anī́, of more
or less doubtful character: arṣaṇī́, cetanī́ (to cétana), tapanī́ (to tap¬
ana), pṛśanī́, vṛjanī́(with vṛjána), rajanī, tedanī́.
j . With accent on the penult: a small number of adjectives: as
turáṇa hasting, dohána milking, manána considerate, bhandána and
mandána rejoicing, sakṣáṇa overcoming, and perhaps vaksáṇā carrying
(the last two with aoristic s); and a still smaller number of neuter actionnouns: daṃsána great deed, vṛjána enclosure, town, veṣáṇa service,
kṛpáṇa misery (against kṛpaṇá miserable), with the masculine kiráṇa dust.
k. The only noticed example of a feminine is in ā: turáṇā. And
a few feminine nouns have the same form: arháṇā, jaráṇā, barháṇā,
bhandánā, maṃhánā, mehánā, vadhánā, vanánā, vaksáṇā. (And
compare the anomalous masc name uśánā: 355 a.)
I. Without strengthening of the root are made a small number of
derivatives: thus (besides those already noted, kṛpáṇa and kṛpaṇá,
vṛjána and vṛjanī́, kiráṇa, turáṇa), further accented examples are
úraṇa, dhúvana, pṛ́śana, bhúvona, vṛ́jana, vṛ́ṣaṇa, -súvana; and
later are found sphuraṇa, sphuṭana, spṛhaṇa, -hnuvana, likhana,
rudana, etc. RV. makes denominativesfrom riṣaṇa-, ruvaṇa-, vipana-,
huvana-.
1150—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 428
m. Stems in ana are made also from secondary conjugation-stems:
thus, from desideratives, [as cikitsana (see 1088); from causatives, as
hāpana, bhīṣaṇa (see 1051 g); from denominatives, with great freedom,
in the later language, as ākarṇana, unmūlana, ślokṣṇona, cihnana;
from intensives and other reduplicated stems, only cankramaṇa, jaṅ–
gamana, jāgaroná, yoyupana.
n. A few isolated cases may be further mentioned: from tense-stems,
-jighraṇa, -ūrṇavana, -paśyona, yacchana, -siñcana; from prepositions, antaraṇa and sámana; astamana from the 4uasi-prefix (1092 b)
astom. Feminines in anā of doubtful connection are yóṣaṇā woman
(beside yóṣan, yoṣā, etc.) and pṛ́tanā.
1151. CRT as. By this suffix are made (usually with
guṇa-strengthening of the root-vowel) especially a large class
of neuter nouns, mostly abstract (action-nouns), but sometimes assuming a concrete value; and also, in the older
language, a few agent-nouns and adjectives, and a considerable number of infinitives.
a. The accent in words ofthe first class is on the root, and in
the second on the ending; and in a few instances words of the two
classes having the same form are distinguished by their accent; the
infinitives have for the most part the accent on the suffix.
1. b. Examples of the first and principal class are: ávas aid,
favor, tápas warmth, práyas pleasure, téjas splendor, śrávas fame,
dóhas milking, káras deed, práthas breadth, cétas and mánas mind,
cákṣas eye, sáras pond, vácas speech.
o. A few words of this class are of irregular formation: thus, without strengthening of the root, júvas quickness (beside jávas), úras
breast, mṛ́dhas contempt; and iras- (irasy-) and vipas-, and the ad_
verbs tirás, mithás, huras-, also śíras head, are to be compared; —
with vṛddhi-strengthening, -vā́cas, vā́sas, vā́has, -svādas, and, of
doubtful connections, pajas, pā́thas, and -hāyas; — perhaps with an
aoristic s, héṣas missile; — pī́vas contains a v apparently not radical.
d. After final ā of a root is usually inserted y before the suffix
(258) : thus, dhā́yas, -gā́yas. But there are in the oldest language apparent remains of a formation in which as was added directly to radical ā:
thus, bhā́s and -das (often to be pronounced as two syllables), jñā́s,
mā́s; and -dhas and -das, from the roots dhā and dā.
2. e. The instances in which an agent-noun is differentiated by its
accent from an action-noun are: ápas work, and apás active; yáśas
beauty, and yaśás beauteous; tàras quickness, and tarás (VS., once)
quick; távas strength, and tavás strong; dúvas worship, and duvás
lively(?); máhas greatness, and mahás great; between rákṣas n. and
429 STEM S I N ána, as, tas, nàs, sas. [—1152
rakṣás m. } both meaning demon, and" between tyájas n. abandonment(?)
and tyajás m. descendant (?), the antithesis is much less clear.
f. Adjectives in ás without corresponding abstracts are: tośás bestowing‚ yajás offering, vedhás pious, probably āhanás heady,' and a few
other words of isolated occurence, as veśás, dhvarás. From a denominative stem is made mṛgayás wild animal (RV., once).
g. But there are also a very few cases of abstract nouns, not neuter,
accented on the ending: thus, jarás old age, bhiyás fear; and doubtless
also havás call, and tveṣás impulse. The feminine uṣás dawn, and
doṣás night, might belong either here or under the last preceding head.
h. Apparently containing a suffix as are the noun upás lap, and
certain proper names: áṅgiras, nodhás, bhalānás, arcanānás, naci¬
ketas. The feminine apsarás nymph is of doubtful derivation.
i . The irregular formation ofsome ofthe words of this division will
be noticed, without special remark.
3. j . The infinitives made by the suffix as have been explained
above (973): they show various treatment of the root, and various
accent (which last may perhaps mark a difference of gender, like that
between sàhas and jaras).
4. k. The formation of derivatives in as from roots compounded
with prefixes is very restricted — if, indeed, it is to be admitted at all.
No infinitive in as occurs with a prefix; nor any action-noun; and the
adjective combinations are in some instances evidently, and in most others
apparently, possessive compounds of the noun with the prefix used adjec¬
tively: the most probable exceptions are -nyökas and víṣpardhas. As in
these examples, the accent is always on the prefix.
1. Certain Vedic stems in ar may be noticed here, as more or less
exchanging with stems in as, and apparently related with such. They
were reported above, at 169 a.
In connection with this, the most common and important suffix
ending in s, may be best treated the others, kindred in office and
possibly also in origin, which end in the same sibilant.
1152. FT" tas, ~R nas, Hīī sas. With these suffixes are
made an extremely small number of action-nouns. Thus:
a. With tas are made rétas seed, and srótas stream.
b. With nas are made ápnas acquisition, árṇas wave, -bhárṇas
offering, rékṇas riches; and in dráviṇas wealth, and párīṇas fulness,
is apparently to be seen the same suffix, with prefixed elements having
the present value of union-vowels. Probably the same is true of dámū¬
nas house-friend, and ṛ́jūnas (RV.) n. pr., uśánas (or -nā) n. pr.
c. With sas is perhaps made vápsas beauty,- and tárūṣas may be
mentioned with it (rather tarus-aP),
1153—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 430
1153. ^Hs. With the suffix is is formed a small number (about a dozen) of nouns.
a. They are in part nouns of action, but most are used concretely.
The radical syllable has the guṇa-strengthening, and the accent is on the
suffix (except in jyótis light, vyáthis, and ā́mis, raw meat). Examples
are: arcís, rocis, and śocís light, chadis or chardis cover, barhis
straw, vartis track, sarpis butter, havis oblation, dyotis light, and kra¬
vis raw flesh. Avis-, pā́this, bhrājis-, and máhis- are isolated variants
of stems in as; and túvis-, śucis-, and surabhis- appear inorganically
for tuvi etc. in a few compounds or derivatives.
1154. 3īī us. With this suffix are made a few words,
of various meaning, root-form, and accent.
a. They are words signifying both action and agent. A few have
both meanings, without difference of accent: thus, tápus heat and hot;
árus wound and sore; cákṣus brightness and seeing, eye ; vápus wonderful and wonder. The nouns are mostly neuter, and accented on the rootsyllable: thus, ā́yus, tárus, púrus, múhus (? only adverbial), míthus
(do.), yájus, śā́sus; exceptions are: in regard to accent, janús birth;
in regard to gender, mánus man, and náhus, proper name. Of adjectives,
are accented on the ending jayús, vanús, and dakṣús burning (which
appears to attach itself to the aorist-stem).
1155. ^ i . With this suffix are formed a large body
of derivatives, of all genders: adjectives and masculine
agent-nouns, feminine abstracts, and a few neuters. They
show a various form of the root: strong, weak, and reduplicated. Their accent is also various. Many of them
have meanings much specialized; and many (including most
of the neuters) are hardly to be connected with any root
elsewhere demonstrable.
1. a. The feminine action-nouns are of very various form: thus,
with weak root-form, rúci brightness, tvíṣi sheen; kṛṣí ploughing, nṛtí
dance; — with guṇa-strengthening (where possible), rópi pain, śocí heat,
vani and sani gain; — with vṛddhi-strengthening, grā́hi seizure, dhrā́¬
ji course, ājí race; from √duṣ comes dū́ṣi (compare dūṣayati, 1042b).
The variety of accent, which seems reducible to no rule, is illustrated by
the examples given. The few infinitively used words of this formation
(above, 975 b) have a weak root-form, with accent on the ending.
2. b. The adjectives and masculine agent-nouns exhibit the same
variety. Thus:
c With unstrengthened root: śúci bright, bhṛ́mi lively (√bhram),
gṛ́bhi container.
431 STEM S I N is, us, i, L [—1156
d. With unstrengthened root (or root incapable of guṇa-change): arí
enemy, máhi great, arcí beam, granthí knot, krīḍí playing; with vrddhiincrement, kā́rṣi, jā́ni, -dhāri, śā́ri, sācí, sādi, -sāhi, and a few words
of obscure connections: thus, drāpí mantle, rāśí heap, pāṇí hand, etc
The isolated -ānaśi appears to come from the perfect-stem (788) of √aś.
e. With reduplicated Toot. This is in the older language a considerable class, of quite various form. Thus: with weak or abbreviated root,
cákri, jághri (√ghar), pápri, sásri, -amri, babhrí, vavrí, jágmi,
-jájñi (√jan), -tatni, jaghni, sásni, súṣvi, -śiśvi; and, with displacement of final ā (or its weakening to the semblance of the suffix), dadi,
papí, yayi (with a case or two from yayī́), -jajñi, dádhi; — from the
ur-form of roots in changeable ṛ, jáguri, táturi, pápuri (púpuri SV.);
— with simple reduplication ‚ cíkiti, yúyudhi, vívici; — with strengthened reduplication, -cācali, tā́tṛpi, dā́dhṛṣi, vā́vahi, sāsahí, tū́tuji
and tūtují, yū́yuvi, yū́yudhi; and jarbhári and bámbhāri. And
karkarí lute and dundubhí drum have the aspect of belonging to the
same class, but are probably onomatopoetic The accent, it will be noticed, is most often on the reduplication,' but not seldom elsewhere (only
once on the root). It was noticed above (271 f) that these reduplicated
derivatives in i not seldom take an object in the accusative, like a present
participle.
f. Formations in i from the root compounded with prefixes are not
at all numerous. They are accented usually on the suffix. Examples are:
āyají, vyānaśí, nijaghní, parādadí, viṣāsahí; but also ājā́ni, āmúri,
vívavri. As compounded with other preceding words, the adjectives or
agent-nouns in i are not rare, and are regularly accented on the root: see
the next chapter, 1276.
g. From √dhā comes a derivative -dhi, forming many masculine
compounds, with the value both of an abstract and a concrete: thus, with
prefixes, antardhí, uddhí, nidhí, paridhi, etc. From √dā is made in
like manner ādi beginning, and from √sthā, pratiṣṭhí resistance. Opinions are at variance as to whether such forms are to be regarded as made
with the suffix i, displacing the radical ā, or with weakening of ā to i.
3. h. Neuter nouns in i are few, and of obscure derivation: examples are ákṣi eye, ásthi bone, dádhi curds, etc.
1156. ^ ī. Stems in ī (like those in ETT ā, above,
1149) are for the most part feminine adjectives, corresponding to masculines and neuters of other terminations.
a. Thus, feminines in ī are made from a-stems (332, 334: and see
also the different suffixes), from i-stems (344, 346), from u-stems (344 b),
from ṛ-stems (376 a), and from various consonant-stems (378 a).
b. But there are also a few stems in ī wearing the aspect of independent derivatives. Examples are dakṣī, dehī, nadī, nāndī́, péṣī,
1156—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 432
vakṣī́ (apparently with aoristic s), veśī́, śā́kī, śácī, śámī, śímī, tarī,
vāpī; they are either action-nouns or agent-nouns. In the later language
(as noticed at 344 a) there is very frequent interchange of i- and ī-stems
and the forms from them.
c. In the oldest language theTe are even a few masculines in ī. They
were noticed, and their inflection illustrated, above, at 355 b‚ 356.
1157. ffl" ti. This suffix forms a large class of frequently used feminine nouns of action; and also a few
agent-nouns (masculine) and adjectives. The root has in
general the same form as before the suffix rT ta of the passive participle (952 ff.) — that is to say, a weak, and often
a weakened or abbreviated, form.
a. The accent ought, it would appear, in analogy with that of
the participle, to rest always upon the suffix; but in the recorded
condition of the language it does so only in a minority of cases:
namely, about fifty, against sixty cases of accent an the radical syllable, and a hundred,and forty of undetermined accent; a number of
words — iti‚ ṛti, citti, tṛpti, pakti, puṣṭi, bhūti, bhṛti, vṛṣṭi, śakti,
śruṣṭi, sṛṣṭi, sthiti — have both accentuations.
1. b. Examples of the normal formation are: rātí gift, ūtí aid,
rītí flow, stuti praise, bhakti division, viṣṭí service, stuti praise, kīrtí
fame, pūrtí bestowal, mati thought, pītí drink (√pā; pple pīta), dhāutí
stream (√dhāv; pple dhāuta); — and with accented root, gáti motion,
śā́ṁti repose, diti division (√dā; pple ditá), dṛ́ṣṭi sight, íṣṭi offering
l√yaj : pple iṣṭá), úkti speech (√vac: pple uktá), vṛ́ddhi increase.
c The roots which form their participle in ita (956) do not have
the i also before ti: thus, only gúpti, -dṛpti. A few roots having their
participle in na instead of ta (957) form the abstract noun also in ni
(below, 1158). And from the roots tan and ran occur tanti and ránti,
beside the more regular tati and ráti; also áhanti (once, VS.) beside
áhati. From roots having the form dā‚ the derivative in composition is
sometimes -tti (for dāti, with loss of radical vowel: compare the participleform -tta, above, 955 f): thus, niravatti (K.), samprátti (ŚB.),
páritti (TB.), vásutti, bhágatti, maghátti (all RV.).
d. A few derivatives are made from reduplicated roots; their accent
is various: thus, carkṛtí, dī́dhiti and -dī́diti, jígarti, and perhaps the
proper name yayā́ti; also jágdhi from √jakṣ (233 f).
e. Derivatives from roots with prefixes are numerous, ancf have (as in
the case of the participles in ta‚ and the action-nouns in tu) the accent
on the prefix: examples are ánumati, abhīti, ā́huti, nírṛti, vyapti,
sáṁgati. The only exceptions noticed are āsaktí and āsutí, and abhi-
433 STEM S I N ī, ti, ni. [—1158
ṣṭí (beside abhíṣṭi). In other combinations than with prefixes, the accentuation is in general the same: see the next chapter (1274).
2. f. The adjectives and agent-nouns — which, as masculines, are
to be connected with these rather than with the feminine abstracts — are
very few: thus, pū́ti putrid, váṣṭi eager, dhū́ti shaker, jñātí relative,
patti footman, páti master; and a few others, of more or less dubious
character. The accent is various, as in the other class.
3. g. A few words show the suffix ti preceded by various vowels,
union- or stem-vowels. The ordinary intermediate i of the ta-participle
etc is seen in sániti, ujhiti, -gṛhīti (ī, as usual with this root: 900 b),
paṭhiti, bhaṇiti; and with them may be mentioned the adjective ṛ́jīti,
the proper names turvī́ti and dabhī́ti, and snī́hitī and snéhitī, notwithstanding their long final. With ati are made a few derivatives, variously accented: thus, the action-nouns aṃhatí, dṛśatí, pakṣatí, mith¬
atí, vasatí, ramáti, vratáti, amáti and ámati, -dhrajati; and the
agent-words aratí, khalatí, vṛkáti, rámati, dahati. In some of these
is to be seen with probability a stem-vowel, as also in jánayati and
rasayati (and RV. has gopayátya). The grammarians' method of representing a root by its 3d sing. pres. indie, declining this as a ti-stem,
begins in the older language: e. g. étivant (TB.), kṣetivant (AB.),
yajati and juhoti and dadāti (S.), nandati (MBh.). The feminine
yúvati young, maiden is of isolated character.
h. In some of the words instanced in the last paragraph, ti is perhaps applied as a secondary suffix. A kindred character belongs to it in
the numeral derivatives from pronominal roots, káti, táti, yáti, and from
numerals, as daśati, viṃśatí, ṣaṣṭí, etc., with paṅktí (from páñca);
in padāti; and in addhātí, from the particle addhā́.
1158. n i . This suffix agrees i n general i n its uses
and i n the form of its derivatives wit h the preceding; but
it makes a very muc h smaller numbe r of words, among
whic h the feminine abstracts are a minority.
a, As was noticed above (1157 c), a few verbs (ending in vowels)
making their passive participle in na instead of ta make their actionnoun in niinstead of ti. From the older language are quotable jyāní
injury, jūmí heat, hāni abandonment (and the masculines ghṛ́ṇi and
jī́rṇi); later occur glāni, -mlāni, sanni-.
b. Words of the other class are: aśni eating, -uṣṇi burning, váhni
carrying, jū́rṇi singing, tū́rṇi hasty, bhū́rṇi excited, dharṇí sustaining,
preṇí loving, vṛṣṇí and vṛ́ṣṇi virile; and with them may be mentioned
pṛ́śni speckled.
c In preṇí, yóni, mení, śréṇi, śróṇi is seen a strengthening of
the radical syllable, such as does not appear among the derivatives in ti.
d. Derivatives in ni from roots with prefixes do not appear to occur.
1158—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 434'
e. In hrādúni and hlāduni we have a prefixed u. In the words
ending in ani, the a has probably the same value with that of ati (above,
1157 g); but ani has gained a more independent status, and may be best
treated as a separate suffix.
1159. ^fö ani. The words made by this suffix have
the same double value with those made by the preceding
suffixes. Their accent is various. Thus:
a. Feminine action-nouns, sometimes with concreted meaning: as,
iṣáṇi impulse, śaráṇi injury, dyotani brightness, ksipaṇí blow, aśáni
missile, vartani track; and –arśani, udani-, jaraṇi-.
b. Adjectives and other agent-words are: aráṇi fire-stick, caráṇi
movable, 'cakṣáṇi enlightener, taráṇi quick, dhamáni pipe, dhvasáni
scattering, vakṣáṇi strengthener, sarani track. Dharaṇi and one or two
other late words are probably variants to stems in am. From a reduplicated root-form comes -paptani. From desiderative stems are made
rurukṣáṇi, siṣāsáni, and (with prefix) ā-śuśukṣáṇi. And a small
number of words appear to attach themselves to an s-aorist stem: thus,
parṣáṇi, saksáṇi, carsaṇí.
c It is questionable whether the infinitives in ṣáṇi (978) are to be
put here, as accusatives of a formation in ani, or under the next suffix,
as locatives of a formation in an, from roots and stems increased by an
aoristic s.
1160. ER^an. Not many words are made with a suffix
of this form, and of these few are plainly to be connected
with roots. Certain rare neuters (along with the doubtful
infinitives) are nouns of action; the rest are masculine
and neuter agent-nouns. The accent is various.
a. The infinitives which admit of being referred to this suffix, as
locative cases, are those in ṣáṇi, of which the sibilant may be the final
of a tense-stem. They are all given above (978).
b. The other action-nouns in an are mahán greatness, rājan authority (RV., once: compare rā́jan; the accent-relation is the reverse of the
usual one), and gámbhan depth (VS., once); and PB. has kṣepṇā once.
c. Agent-nouns (in part of doubtful connection) are: ukṣán ox,
cákṣan eye, tákṣan carpenter, dhvasán proper name, pūṣán name of
a god, majján marrow, rā́jan king, vṛ́ṣan virile, bull, sághan, snīhán
(snūhan Āpast.); also -gman, jmán, -bhvan, -śvan, with śván, yú¬
van, yóṣan, aud the stems áhan, ū́dhan, etc. (430—4), filling up the
inflection of other defective stems.
d. With prefixes occur pratidī́van and átidīvan, vibhván, ní¬
kāman.
4 3 5 STEM S I N ni, ani, an, tu, nu. 1—1162
1161. rī tu. The great mass of the words of this form¬
ation are the infinitives — accusatives in the later language, in the earlier likewise datives and ablative-genitives:
see above, 970b, 972, But a few are also used independently, as action-nouns or with concreted meaning; and an
extremely small number, of somewhat questionable character, appear to have the value of agent-words. They are of
all genders, but chiefly masculine. The root has the guṇastrengthening.
a. The infinitive words are accented on the radical syllable when
simple, and most ofthe others have the same accent; but a few have
the tone on the ending.
b. Examples are: of the regular formation, masc dā́tu share, jātubirth, dhā́tu element, tántu thread, mántu counsel, ótu weft, sātu
receptacle, sétu tie, sótu pressure; also krátu capacity, and sáktu grits,•
fem. vástu morning; neut. vastu thing, vā́stu abode; — with accent
on the ending, aktú ray, jantú being, gātú way and song, yātú (?)
demon, hetú cause, ketú banner (all masc); —with unstrengthened root,
ṛtú season, pitú drink, sū́tu birth, and apparently kṛ́tu (in kṛ́tvas times');
with vṛddhi-strengthening, vā́stu (above). Agent-nouns appear to be
dhā́tu drinkable and kroṣṭu jackal.
0. The infinitives in tu have (968) often the union-vowel i before
the suffix, and this in a few cases is lengthened to ī. In other use occur
also -stárītu and -dhárītu (both with dus), -hávītu (with su); tur¬
phárītu seems of the same formation, but is obscure.
d. In a few instances, the suffix tu appears to be added to a tenseor conjugation-stem in a; thus, edhatú and vahatú; tamyatú and
tapyatú; and siṣāsátu. The accent of the last is paralleled only by
that of jīvā́tu life, which is further exceptional in showing a long a; it
is used sometimes in the manner of an infinitive.
1162. *T nu. This suffix forms a comparatively small
body of words, generally masculine, and having both the
abstract and the concrete value.
a. The accent is usually on the ending, and the root unstrengthened.
b. Thus: kṣepnú jerk, bhānú light (later sun), vagnú sound,
sūnú son, dā́nu (with irregular accent) m. f. demon, n. drop, dew; dhenú
f. cow; — gṛdhnú haáty, tapnú burning, trasnu fearful, dhṛṣṇú bold;
— and víṣṇu Fis7inu, and perhaps sthāṇú pillar. Compare also suffix
tnu, 1196 a.
1162—] XVII. PRIMARY DERIVATION. 436
c This also (like tu) appears sometimes with a prefixed a: thus,
kṣipaṇú missile, krandanú and nadanú roaring, nabhanú (and -nū́,
f.) fountain, vibhañjanú (only instance with prefix) breaking to pieces;
and perhaps the proper names dāsanu and kṛśā́nu belong here.
1163. Sftha. The words made with this suffix are almost without exception action-nouns (though some have
assumed a concrete value). They are of all genders. The
root is of a weak (or even weakened) form, and the accent
usually on the suffix.
a. Thus: masc, -itha going, ártha goal, -kṛtha making, gāthá
song, pakthá n. pr., bhṛthá offering, -yātha road, -śītha lying down,
śotha swelling, siktha sediment; and, of less clear connections, yūthá
herd, rátha chariot; — neut., ukthá saying, tīrthá ford, nīthá song,
rikthá heritage, and apparently pṛṣṭhá back; —fem.(with ā), gā́thā
song, nī́thā way. Radical ā is weakened to ī in gī́tha song and -pītha
drink and -pītha protection; a final nasal is lost in -gatha going and
hátha slaying. In vijigīthá (ŚB.; but BAU. -īta) is apparently seen a
formation from a reduplication of √ji, victorious.
b. A few examples of combination with prefixes occur, with accent
on the final: thus, nirṛthá destruction, saṁgathá union, etc.
c. Still more common in the older language is a form of this suffix
to which has become prefixed an á, which is probably of thematic origin,
though become a union-vowel. Thus : -anátha breathing, ayátha foot,
carátha mobility, tveṣátha vehemence, and so prothátha, yajátha, ra¬
vátha, vakṣátha, ucátha, vidátha, śaṃsatha, śapátha, śayátha,
śvayátha, śvasátha, sacátha, stanátha, stavátha, sravátha, and,
with weak root-form, ruvátha; the later language adds karatha, taratha,
śamatha, savatha. With a prefix, the accent is thrown forward upon
the final: thus, āvasathá abode, pravasathá absence; but prāṇátha
breath is treated as if prān were an integral root.
d. Isolated combinations of tha with other preceding vowels occur:
thus, várūtha protection, járūtha wasting (?); and matútha (√man ?).
1164. ~ thu. This suffix (like 5f tha, above) has an 351 á
attached to it, and, in the very few derivatives which it
makes, appears only as E|5Ī áthu.
a. The only Vedic examples are ejáthu quaking, vepáthu trembling,
stanáthu roaring. Later cases are nandáthu (TS.), nadathu (U,),
kṣavathu (S.), davathu, bhraṃśathu, majjathu, vamathu, śvayathu,
sphūrjathu.
1165. TJ yu. With this suffix are made a very few nouns,
437 STEM S I N nu, tha‚ thu, yu, ma, mi, man. [—1168
both of agent and of action, with unstrengthened root and
various accent. Thus:
a. Abstracts (masc.) are manyú wrath, mṛtyú death (with t added
to the short final of the root).
b. Adjectives etc. are druhyú n. pr., bhujyú pliable, mucyu (GB.
i . I. 7), śundhyú pure; yájyu pious, sáhyu strong, dásyu enemy; and,
with vṛddhi-strengthening, jāyú victorious.
c. For other derivatives ending in yu, see the suffix u, below, 1178h,i.
1166. 1% ma. The action-nouns made by this suffix are
almost all masculine; and they are of various root-form and
accent, as are also the agent-nouns and adjectives.
a. Examples of action-nouns are: ajmá course, gharmá heat; éma
progress, bhā́ma brightness, sárma flow, stóma song of praise.
b. Examples of agent-nouns etc. are: tigmá sharp, bhīmá terrible,
śagmá mighty, idhmá fuel, yudhmá warrior. A single instance from
a reduplicated root is tūtumá powerful. Sarámā f., with a before the
suffix, is of doubtful connection.
c. A number of stems in ma have stems in man beside them, and
appear, at least in part, to be transfers from the an- to the a-declension.
Such are ajma, oma, ema, arma, tókma, darmá, dhárma, narmá,
yā́ma, yugma, vema, śuṣma, sóma, sárma, hóma.
1167. fīf mi. A very small number of nouns, masculine and
feminine, formed with mi‚ may be conveniently noticed here.
Thus, from ṛ-roots, ūrmí wave, -kūrmi action, sūrmī́ f. tube; from
others, jāmí relation, bhū́mi or bhū́mī f. earth, lakṣmī́ sign; also probably raśmí line, ray,* and the adjective krúdhmi (*? RV., once).
1168. ī-R man. The numerous derivatives made with
this suffix are almost only action-nouns. The great majority
of them are neuter, and accented on the root-syllable; a
much smaller number are masculine, and accented on the
suffix. The few agent-words are, if nouns, masculine, and
have the latter accent: in several instances, a neuter and
a masculine, of the one and the other value and accent,
stand side by side. The root has in general the guṇastrengthening.
1. a. Examples of regularly formed neuters are: kárman action,
jánman birth, nā́man name, vártman track, véśman dwelling, hóman
sacrifice, -dyótman splendor.
1168—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 4 3 8
b. Examples of masculine abstracts are: omàn favor, ojmán strength,
jemán conquest, svādmán sweetness, hemán impulse.
c. Corresponding neuter action-nouns and masculine agent-nouns are:
brahman worship and brahmán priest; daman gift and dāmán giver;
dhárman rule and dharmán orderer; sádman seat and sadmán sitter.
But Oman friend stands in the contrary relation to omán m. favor. Very
few other agent-nouns occur; and all, except brahman, are of rare occurrence.
d. On the other hand, jeman and varṣman and svādman (and
variman) have the difference of gender and accent without a corresponding
difference ofmeaning.
e. The noun áśman stone, though masculine, is accented on the
radical syllable; and two or three other questionable cases ofthe same kind
occur.
f. The derivatives in man used as infinitives (974) have for the
most part the accent of neuters: the only exception is vidmáne.
g. A few words, of either class, have an irregular root-form: thus,
údman, ūṣmán or uṣman, bhū́man earth, bhūmán abundance, syū́¬
man, sīmán, bhujmàn, vidmán, śíkman, śuṣman, sidhman; aud
kā́rṣman, bhā́rman, śā́kman.
h. Derivatives in man from roots with prefixes are not numerous.
They are usually accented on the prefix, whether action-nouns or adjectives:
thus, prábharman forthbringing, práyāman departure; ánuvartman
following after: the exceptions, vijā́man, prativartmán, visarmán, are
perhaps of possessive formation.
2. I. The same suffix, though only with its abstract-making value,
has in a number of cases before it a union-vowel, i or ī ; and imán
comes to be used as a secondary suffix, forming abstract nouns (masculine) from a considerable number of adjectives.
j . The neuters in iman and īman are primary formations, belonging
almost only to the older language: thus, jániman, dhariman (M.), váriman (beside varimán, as noticed above); and dárīman, dhárīman,
párīman (and páreman SV., once), bhárīman, várīman, sárīman,
stárīman, sávīman, and hávīman. Those in īman are hardly met
with outside the Rig-Veda.
k. The masculines in imán are in the oldest language less frequent
than the neuters just described: they are tániman (?), jarimán, prathi¬
mán, mahimán, varimán (beside the equivalent váriman and várī¬
man), varṣimán (beside the equivalent várṣman and varṣmán), hari¬
mán, and drāghimán (VS.) beside drāghmán (V.B.). Some of these,
as well as ofthe derivatives in simple man, attach themselves in meaning,
or in form also, to adjectives, to which they seem the accompanying abstracts: compare the similar treatment of the primary comparatives and
superlatives (above, 468): such are pāpmán (to pāpá, pā́pīyas etc.);
drāghmán etc. (to dīrghá, drā́ghīyas, etc.); váriman etc. (to urú,
439 STEM S I N man, van, vana, vani, vanu. [—-1170
várīyas, etc); práthiman (to pṛthú, práthiṣṭha); harimán (to hári
or hárita); várṣman etc (to várṣīyas etc); svā́dman etc (to svādú,
svā́dīyas, etc.). Then in the Brāhmaṇa language are found further examples : thus, dhūmrimán (TS. K.), draḍhimán (MS. K . : to dṛḍhá,
dráḍhīyas, etc), aṇimán (ŚB.; and áṇiman n. bií), sthemán, sthá–
viman (n. big piece), taruṇiman (K.), paruṣiman (AB.), abaliman
(ChU.), lohitiman (KB.); and still later such as laghiman, kṛṣṇiman,
pūrṇiman, madhuriman, śoṇiman, etc., etc.
1169. ~T^van. By this suffix are made almost only
agent-words, adjectives and nouns, the latter chiefly masculines. The root is unstrengthened, and to a short final
vowel is added a rf t before the suffix. The accent is al¬
most always on the root, both in the simple words and in
their compounds.
a, The insertion of t is an intimation that the words of this form are
originally made by the addition of an to derivatives in u and tu; yet
van has the present value of an integral suffix in the language, and must
be treated as such.
b. Examples of the usual formation are: masc. yájvan offering,
drúhvan harming, śákvan capable, -rikvan leaving, -jitvan conquering,
sútvan pressing, kṛ́tvan actiue, -gátvan (like -gat, -gatya) going, sát¬
van (√san) warrior; neut. párvan joint, dhánvan bow. Irregular, with
strengthened root, are árvan courser, -yāvan (? AV.) driving off; and,
with accent on the suffix, dṛván (? VS.) and vidván (? AV.).
0. Examples from roots with prefixes (which are not rare) are : atītvan
excelling, upahásvan reuiler, sambhṛ́tvan collecting; and perhaps vivás¬
van shining: abhisatvan is a compound with governing preposition (1310),
For the compounds with other elements, which, except in special cases,
have the same accent, see below, 1277.
d. The stems muṣīván robber and sanitvan (each RV., once) are the
only ones with a union-vowel, and are perhaps better regarded as secondary derivatives — of which a few are made with this suffix: see below,
1234. From a reduplicated root are made rárāvan and cikitván (and
possibly vivásvan).
e. Action-nouns made with the suffix van are only the infinitival
words mentioned at 974 — unless bhurváṇi (RV,, once) is to be added,
as locative of bhurván.
f. The feminines corresponding to adjectives in van are not
made (apparently) directly from this suffix, but from vara, and end
in varī; see below, 1171b.
1170. vana, srfīī vani, 5R vanu. The very few words
1170—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 440
made with these suffixes may best be noticed here, in connection with 3FT van (of which the others are probably secondary extensions).
a. With vana are made vagvaná talkative, satvaná warrior (beside
sátvan, above); and, from a reduplicated root, śuśukvaná shining.
b. With vani are made from simple roots turváṇi excelling, and
bhurváṇi restless, and, from reduplicated roots, śuśukváni shining, da¬
dhṛṣváṇi daring, tuturváṇi striving after, and jugurváṇi praising; ar¬
hariṣváṇi is obscure.
c. With vanu is made only vagvanú tone, noise.
1171. ~T vara. With this suffix are made a few derivatives, of all genders, having for the most part the value
of agent-nouns and adjectives. Much more common are the
feminine stems in varī, which, from the earliest period,
serve as corresponding feminines to the masculine stems
in cR van.
a. A few masculine adjectives in vará occur, formally accordant (except in accent) with the feminines: thus, itvará going, -advara eating;
and so, further, in the older language, īśvará, -jāvara, phárvara,
bhārvará, bhāsvará, vyadhvaráp), -sadvara, sthāvará, and doubtless with them belongs vidvalá; later, -kasvara, gatvara, ghasvara
(also ghasmara), -jitvara, naśvara, pīvara, madvara, -sṛtvara;
from a reduplicated root, yāyāvará (B. and later). Many of these have
feminines in ā.
b. The feminines in varī accord in treatment of the root and in
accent with the masculines in van to which they correspond: thus, yáj¬
varī, -jítvarī, sṛ́tvarī, -śī́varī, -yāvarī, and so on (about twenty-five
such formations in RV,); from a reduplicated root, -śiśvarī.
C A very small number of neuters occur, with accent on the root:
thus, kárvara deed, gáhvara (later also gabhvara) thicket; and a feminine or two, with accent on the penult: urvárā field, and urvárī tow
(both of doubtful etymology).
We take up now the suffites by which are made only stems
having the value of agent-nouns and adjectives ; beginning with a
brief mention of the participial endings, which in general have been
already sufficiently treated.
1172. 3"f—
ant (or Wī at). The office of this suffix, in
making present and future participles active, has been fully
explained above, in connection with the various tense-stems
and conjugation-stems (chaps. VIII.—XIV.), in combination
441 STEM S I N vana etc., vara, ant, vans, māna, ana, ta. [—1176
with which alone it is employed (not directly with the root,
unless this is also used as tense-stem).
a. A few words of like origin, but used as independent adjectives,
were given at 450. With the same or a formally identical suffix are made
from pronominal roots iyant and kiyant (451, 517 a), And ádvayant
not double-tongued (RV., once), appears to contain a similar formation from
the numeral dvi — unless we are to assume a denominative verb-stem as
intermediate.
1173. cfÍH^vāṃs (or 5Tīī^vas). For the (perfect active) participles made with this suffix, see above, 802—6, and 458 ff.
a. A few words of irregular and questionable formation were noticed
at 462, above. Also, apparent transfers to a form us or uṣa. RV. vocalizes the v once, in jujuruā́n.
b. The oldest language (RV.) has a very few words in vas, of doubtful relations: ṛ́bhvas and śíkvas skilful (beside words in va and van),
and perhaps khidvas (√khād). The neuter abstract várivas breadth,
room (belonging to urú broad, in the same manner with várīyas and
varimán), is quite isolated, MBh. makes a nominative pīvān, as if from
pīvāṃs instead of pīvan.
1174. -"fFT māna . The participles having this ending
are, as has been seen (584 b), present and future only, and
have the middle, or the derived passive, value belonging in
general to the stems to which the suffix is attached.
1175. 30TR ana. The participles ending in -SIFT ana are
of middle and passive value, like those just noticed, and
either present, perfect, or (partly with the form īīFT sāna :
above, 897 b) aorist.
a. A few other words ending in the same manner in the old language
may be mentioned here. The RV. has the adjectives tákavāna, bhṛ́ga¬
vāṇa, vásavāna, ūrdhvasāná, apparently made on the model of participial stems. Also the proper names ápnavāna, pṛ́thavāna, and cyá¬
vāna and cyávatāna. Párśāna abyss is doubtful; rujā́nā (RV., once)
is probably a false reading; ā́pnāna is of doubtful character.
1176. FT ta. The use of this suffix in forming participles directly from the root, or from a conjugational (not
a tense) stem, was explained above, 952—6. The participles
thus made are in part intransitive, but in great part passive
1176—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 442
in value (like those made by the two preceding suffixes, but
in much larger measure, and more decidedly).
a. A few general adjectives, or nouns with concrete meaning, are
adaptations of this participle. Examples are: tṛṣṭá rough, śītá cold, dṛ¬
ḍhá (for dṛḍhá: 224a) firm; dūtá messenger, sūtá charioteer; ṛtá right,
gḥṛtá ghee, jātá kind, dyūtá gambling, nṛttá dance, jīvitá life, caritá
behavior, smita smile. The adjective tigitá (RV.) sharp shows anomalous
reversion of palatal to guttural before the i (216 d). Vāvā́ta dear is a
single example from a reduplicated root.
b. Doubtless after the example and model of participles from denominative stems (of which, however, no instances are quotable from the Veda
— unless bhāmita RV.), derivatives in ita are in the later language
made directly from noun and adjective-stems, having the meaning of endowed with, affected by, made to be, and the like (compare the similar English formation in ed, as horned, barefooted, bluecoated). Examples are ra¬
thita furnished with a chariot, duḥkhita pained, kusumita flowered,
durbalita weakened, niḥsaṁśayita indubitable, etc. etc.
c. A few words ending in ta are accented on the radical syllable,
and their relation to the participial derivatives is very doubtful: such are
ásta home, márta mortal, vā́ta wind; and with them may be mentioned
gárta high seat, nákta night, hásta hand. Vratá is commonly viewed
as containing a suffix ta, but it doubtless comes from √vṛt (vrat-á, like
tradá, vrajá) and means originally course.
d. Several adjectives denoting color end in ita, but are hardly connective with roots of kindred meaning: thus, palitá gray, ásita black,
róhita and lóhita red, hárita green; akin with them are éta variegated,
śyetá white. The feminines of these stems are in part irregular: thus,
énī and śyénī; róhiṇī and lóhinī, and háriṇī (but the corresponding
masc. hárma also occurs); and ásiknī, páliknī, and háriknī.
e. A small number of adjectives in the olderlanguage ending in ata
are not to be separated from the participial words in ta, although their
specific meaning is in part gerundive. They are : pacatá cooked, darśatá
and paśyata seen, to be seen, worth seeing; and so yajatá, haryatá, bha¬
ratá. The y of paśyata and haryatá indicates pretty plainly that the
a also is that of a present tense-stem. Rajatá silvery is of more obscure
relation to √raj color; párvata mountain must be secondary.
1177. *T na (and ina, 3 ~ una). The use of the suffix
^ na in forming from certain roots participles equivalent to
those in ft ta, either alongside the latter or instead of them,
was explained above, at 957.
a. With the same suffix are made a number of general adjectives,
and of nouns of various gender (fem. in na). The accent is on the suffix
443 STEM S I N ta, na, ina, una, u. [--1178
or on the root. A few examples are: uṣṇá hot, śuná fortunate, áśna
ravenous, śvítna white; masc, praśná question, yajñá offering, ghṛṇá
heat, várṇa color, svápna sleep; neut., parṇá wing, rátna jewel (?);
fem. tṛ́ṣṇā thirst, yācñā́ supplication. But many of the stems ending in
na are not readily connectible with roots. An antithesis of accent is seen
in kárṇa ear and karṇá eared.
b. The few words ending in ina are of doubtful connection, but may
be mentioned here: thus, aminá violent, vṛjiná crooked, dákṣiṇa right,
dráviṇa property, druhiṇa, -śreṣiṇa, hariṇá; and kanī́na may be added.
c. The words ending in una are of various meaning and accent, like
those in ana: they are árjuna, karúṇa, -cetúna, táruṇa, dāruṇá,
dharúṇa, narúṇa, píśuna, mithuná, yatúna, vayúna, varuṇa, śa¬
lúna, and the feminine yamúnā; and bhrūṇá may be added.
d. These are all the proper participial endings of the language.
The gerundives, later and earlier, are in the main evident secondary
formations, and will be treated under the head of secondary derivation.
We take up now the other suffixes forming agent-nouns and
adjectives, beginning with those which have more or less a participial value.
1178. 3 u. With this sufftx are made a considerable
body of derivatives, of very various character — adjectives,
and agent-nouns of all genders, with different treatment of
the root, and with different accent. It is especially used
with certain conjugational stems, desiderative (particularly
later) and denominative (mainly earlier), making adjectives
with the value of present participles; and in such use it
wins in part the aspect of a secondary suffix.
a. The root has oftenest a weak (or weakened) form; but it is
sometimes vriddhied; least often (when capable of guṇa), it has the
guṇa-strengthening — all without any apparent connection with either
accent or meaning or gender. After final radical ā is usually added
y (258) before the suffix. A few derivatives are made from the reduplicated root. But many words ending in u are not readily, or not
at all, connectible with roots; examples will be given especially of
those that have an obvious etymology.
b. Examples of ordinary adjectives are: urú wide, ṛjú straight, pṛthú
broad, mṛdú soft, sādhú good, svādú sweet, tápu hot, vásu good; jā¬
yú conquering, dārú bursting; śayú lying, réku empty; dhāyú thirsty,
pāyú protecting. Final ā appears to be lost before the suffix in -sthu
(suṣṭhú, anuṣṭhú), and perhapsin yú, -gu (agregú), and -khu (ākhú).
c. Examples of nouns are: masc, aṃśú ray, ripú deceiver, vāyú
1178—] XYII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 444
wind-god, ásu life, manu man, Manu; fem., íṣu (also masc.) arrow,
síndhu (also masc.) river, tanū́ or tanú body; neut., kṣú food.
d. Derivatives from reduplicated roots are: cikitú, jágmu, jigyú,
jijñu, siṣṇu, -tatnu (unless this is made with nu or tnu), didyu (?),
dadru, yáyu or yayú and yiyu (with final ā lost), pipru (proper name),
-dīdhayu; and títaü, babhrú, -raru (aráru), malimlú (?) have the
aspect of being similar formations.
e. A few derivatives are made from roots with prefixes, with various
accentuation: for example, upāyú on-coming, pramayú going to destruction, viklindu a certain disease, abhī́śu rein (directer), sáṁvasu dwelling together.
f. From tense-stems, apparently, are made tanyú thundering, bhindú
splitting, -vindu finding, and (with aoristic s) dákṣu and dhákṣu (all RV.).
g. Participial adjectives in ú from desiderative "roots" (stems with
loss of their final a) are sufficiently numerous in the ancient language (RV.
has more than a dozen of them, AV. not quite so many) to show that the
formation was already a regular one, extensible at will; and later such
adjectives may be made from every desiderative. Examples (older) are:
ditsú, dipsú, cikitsú, titikṣú, pipīṣu, mumukṣú, iyakṣú, śiślik¬
ṣú; with prefix, abhidipsú; with anomalous accent, didṛ́kṣu. These adjectives, both earlier and later, may take an object in the accusative (271a).
h. A few similar adjectives are made in the older language from caus¬
atives: thus, dhārayú (persistent), bhājayú, bhāvayú, maṃhayú, man¬
dayú, śramayú; and mṛgayú from the caus.-denom. mṛgáya.
i. Much more numerous, however, are such formations from the more
proper denominatives, especially in the oldest language (RV. has toward
eighty of them; AV. only a quarter as many, including six or eight which
are not found in RV.; and they are still rarer in the Brāhmaṇas, and
hardly met with later). In a majority of cases, personal verbal forms from
the same denominative stem are in use: thus, for example, to aghāyú,
arātīyú, śūyú, caraṇyú, manasyú, saniṣyú, uruṣyú, saparyú; in
others, only the present participle in yánt, or the abstract noun in yā́
(1149d), or nothing at all. A few are made upon denominative stems from
pronouns: thus, tvāyú (beside tvāyánt and tvāyā́), yuvayú or yuvāyú,
asmayú, svayú, and the more anomalous ahaṁyú and kiṁyú. Especially where no other denominative forms accompany the adjective, this has
often the aspect of being made directly from the noun with the suffix yu,
either with a meaning of seeking or desiring, or with a more general adjective sense: thus, yavayú seeking grain, varāhayú boar-hunting, stanasyú
desiring the breast / ūrṇāyú woolen, yuvanyú youthful, bhīmayú terrible.
And so the "secondary sufAx yu" wins a degree ofstanding and application
as one forming derivative adjectives (as in ahaṁyú and kiṁyú, above,
and doubtless some others, even of the RV. words). In three RV. cases,
the final as of a noun-stem is even changed to 'o before it : namely, aṃ¬
hoyú, duvoyú (and duvoyā́; beside duvasyú), áskṛdhoyu.
445 STEM S I N U , Ū, uka. [—1180
j . The words in yu do not show in the Veda resolution into iu (except dhāsiús AV., once).
1179. "37 ū. Stems i n ~ ū are very few, even as
compared with those i n ^ ī (1156). They are for the most
part feminines corresponding to masculines in u (344b),
with half-a-dozen more independent feminines (see 355 c).
a. To those already mentioned above are to be added karṣū́ pit,
-calū (in puṁścalū́), -janū (in prajanū́), śumbhū́.
1180. 3~í uka. Wit h this suffix are made derivatives
having the meaning and construction (271g) of a present
participle. The root is strengthened, and has the accent.
a. The derivatives in uka are hardly known in the Veda; but they
become frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, of whose language they are a marked
characteristic (about sixty different stems occur there); and they are found
occasionally in the older language. In all probability, they are originally and
properly obtained by adding the secondary suffix ka(1222) to a derivative
in u; but they have gained fully the character of primary formations, and
in only an instance or two is there found in actual use an u-word from
which they should be made.
b. The root is only so far strengthened that the radical syllable is a
heavy (79) one; and it has the accent, whether the derivative is made
from a simple root or from one with prefix.
c. Examples, from the Brāhmaṇa language, are: vā́duka, nā́śuka,
upakrā́muka, prapā́duka, upasthāyuka (258), vyāyuka, véduka,
bhā́vuka, kṣódhuka, hā́ruka, várṣuka, samárdhuka, dáṃśuka,
ālambuka, śikṣuka (OB.: RV. has śikṣú), pramā́yuka (SB. has
pramāyu).
d. Exceptions as regards root-form are: nirmā́rguka (with vṛddhistrengthening, as is usual with this root: 627), -kasuka, ṛdhnuka (from
a tense-stem; beside árdhuka). AV. accents sáṁkasuka (ŚB. has
saṁkásuka) and víkasuka; RV. has sānuká (which is its only example
of the formation, if it be one; AV. has also ghā́tuka from √han, and
ápramāyuka); vasuká (TS. et al.) is probably of another character.
Aśanāyuka (PB. et al.) is the only example noticed from a conjugation-stem.
e. Of later occurrence are a few words whose relation to the others
is more or less doubtful: kārmuka and dhārmuka, tsāruka, tarkuka,
nānduka, pādukā, pecuka, bhikṣuka, lāṣuka, seduka, hiṇḍuka,
hreṣuka. Of these, only lāṣuka appears like a true continuer of the
formation; several are pretty clearly secondary derivatives.
f. A formation in ūka (a suffix of like origin, perhaps, with uka)
may be mentioned here: namely, indhūka, majjūka, and, from redu-
1180--] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 446
plicated roots, jāgarū́ka wakeful, jañjapūka (later) muttering, danda¬
śū́ka biting, yāyajū́ka sacrificing much, vāvadūka (later) talkative;
salalū́ka is questionable.
1181. aka. Here, as in the preceding case, we
doubtless have a suffix made by secondary addition of "fí ka
to a derivative in a; but it has, for the same reason as
the other, a right to be mentioned here. Its free use in
the manner of a primary suffix is of still later date than
that of uka; it has very few examples in the older language.
a. In RV. is found (besides pāvakà, which has a different accent,
and which, as the metre shows, is really pavāka) only sā́yaka missile;
AV. adds pīyaka and vádhaka, and VS. abhikróśaka. But in the later
language such derivatives are common, more usually with raising of the rootsyllable by strengthening to heavy quantity: thus, nāyaka, dāyaka (258),
pācaka, grāhaka, bodhaka, jāgaraka; but also jan aka, khanaka.
They are declared by the grammarians to have the accent on the radical
syllable. They often occur in copulative composition with gerundives of
the same root: thus, bhakṣyabhakṣaka eatable and eater, vācyavācaka
designated and designation, and so on.
b. That the derivatives in aka sometimes take an accusative object
was pointed out above (271c).
c. The corresponding feminine is made sometimes in akā or in akī,
but more usually in ikā: thus, nāyikā (with nāyakā), pācikā, bo¬
dhikā; compare secondary aka, below, 1222.
d. Derivatives in aka are made from a few roots: thus, jalpāka,
bhikṣōka; but very few occur in the olderlanguage: thus, pavāka (above,
a), nabhāka, smayā́ka, jáhāka(?), -calāka, patākā. With āku is
made in RV. mṛḍayā́ku, from the causative stem: pṛ́dāku and the proper name íkṣvāku are of obscure connection.
e. Derivativesin ika and īka will be treated below, in connection
with those in ka (1188 c).
1182. r[ tṛ (or tar). The derivatives made by this
suffix, as regards both their mode of formation and their
uses, have been the subject of remark more than once
above (see 369 ff., 942 ff). Agent-nouns are freely formed
with it at every period of the language; these in the oldest
language are very frequently used participially, governing
an object in the accusative (271 d); later they enter into
combination with an auxiliary verb, and, assuming a future
447 STEM S I N ūka, aka, tṛ, in. [—1183
meaning, make a periphrastic future tense (942). Their
corresponding feminine is in trī.
a. The root has regularly the guṇa-strengthening. A union-vowel
i (very rarely, one of another character) is often taken: as regards
its presence or absence in the periphrastic iuture forms, see above
(943 a).
b. Without guṇa-change is only úṣṭṛ plough-ox (no proper agentnoun: apparently úkṣ-tṛ: compare the nouns of relationship further on).
The root grah has, as usual, ī — thus, grahītṛ́; and the same appears
in -tarītṛ́, -pavītṛ́, -marītṛ́, -varītṛ, -savītṛ. An u-vowel is taken
instead by tárutṛ and tarutṛ́, dhánutṛ, and sánutṛ; long in varūtṛ́;
strengthened to o in manótṛ and manotṛ́. From a reduplicated root
comes vāvā́tṛ.
c The accent, in the older language, is sometimes on the suffix
and sometimes on the root; or, from roots combined with prefixes,
sometimes on the suffix and sometimes on the prefix.
d. In general, the accent on the root or prefix accompanies the participial use of the word; but there are exceptions to this: in a very few instances (four), a word with accented suffix has an accusative object; very
much more often, accent on the root appears along with ordinary noun
value. The accent, as well as the form, of manótṛ is an isolated irregularity. Examples are: jétā dhànāni winning treasures; yūyám már¬
taṁ śrótāraḥ ye listen to a mortal; but, on the other hand, yaṁtā́
vásūni vidhaté bestowing good things on the pious; and jétā jánānām
conqueror of peoples.
e. The formation of these nouns in tṛ from conjugation-stems, regular
and frequent in the later language, and not very rare in the Brāhmaṇas,
is met with but once or twice in the Veda (bodhayitṛ́ and codayitrī́,
RV.). In néṣṭṛ a certain priest (RV. and later), is apparently seen the
aoristic s.
f. The words of relationship which, in whatever way, have gained
the aspect of derivatives in tṛ, are pitṛ́, mātṛ́, bhrā́tṛ, yā́tṛ, duhitṛ́,
náptṛ, jā́mātṛ. Of these, only mātṛ́ and yā́tṛ are in accordance with
the ordinary rules of the formation in tṛ.
g. Instead of tṛ is found tur in one or two RV. examples: yaṁtúr,
sthātúr.
h. Apparently formed by a suffix ṛ (or ar) are usṛ́, savyaṣṭhṛ,
nánāndṛ, devṛ́, the last two being words of relationship. For other words
ending in ṛ, see 369.
1183. Ś^in. This is another suffix which has assumed
a primary aspect and use, while yet evidently identical in
real character with the frequent secondary suffix of the
same form denoting possession (below, 1230).
1183—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 448
a. How far it had gained a primary value in the early language is
not easy to determine. Most of the words in in occurring in RV. and AV.
are explainable as possessives; in many the other value is possible, and in
a few it is distinctly suggested: thus, kevalādín, bhadravādín,nitodín,
āśārāiṣín, ánāmin, vivyādhín; from a tense-stem, -aśnuvin, -paśyin
(late); with aoristic s, -sakṣín; and, with reduplication, niyayín, vadā¬
vadin. As the examples indicate, composition, both with prefixes and
with other elements, is frequent; and, in all cases alike, the accent is on
the suffix.
b. Later, the primary employment is unquestionable, and examples of
it, chiefly in composition, are frequent. The radical syllable is usually
strengthened, a medial a being sometimeslengthened and sometimes remaining unchanged. Thus, satyavādin truth-speaking, abhibhāṣin addressing,
manohārin soul-winning. In bhāvin has established itself a prevailingly
future meaning, about to be.
c. The use of an accusative object with words in in was noticed
above (271b),
1184. "j^jc-f īyas and ^"? iṣṭha. These suffixes, which, from
forming intensive adjectives corresponding to the adjective of rootform, have come to be used, within somewhat narrow limits, as suffixes of adjective comparison, have been already sufficiently treated
above, under the head of comparison (466—470).
a. It may be further noticed that jyéṣṭha has in the older language
(only two or three times in RV.) the accent also on the final, jyeṣṭhá,
and that its correlative also is kaniṣṭhá in the oldest language; párṣiṣṭha
is made from a secondary form of root, with aoristic s added.
b. When the comparative suffix has the abbreviated form yas (470 a),
its y is never to be read in the Veda as i .
c. No other suffixes make derivatives having participial value
otherwise than in rare and sporadic cases; those that remain, therefore, will be taken up mainly in the order of their frequency and
importance.
1185. tra. With this suffix are formed a few adjectives, and a considerable number of nouns, mostly neuter,
and often having a specialized meaning, as signifying the
means or instrument of the action expressed by the root.
The latter has usually the guṇa-strengthening, but sometimes remains unchanged. The accent is various, but more
often on the radical syllable.
a. Here, as in certain other cases above, we have doubtless a suffix
4 4 9 STEMS I N īyas, iṣṭha, tra ETC. , ka. [—1186
originally secondary, made by adding a to the primary tṛ or tar (1182);
but its use is in great part that of a primary suffix.
b. Examples of neuter nouns are : gā́tra limb, páttra wing, patra
cup, yóktra bond, vástra garment, śrótra ear; astrá missile, stotrá
song of praise, potrá vessel; of more general meaning, dáttra gift, kṣé¬
tra field, mū́tra urine, hotrá sacrifice. The words accented on the final
have often an abstract meaning: thus, kṣatrá authority, rāṣṭrá kingdom,
śāstrá doctrine, sattrá sacrificial 3ession (also jñā́tra knowledge).
c. Masculines are: dáṃṣṭra tusk, mántra prayer, attrá (or atrá:
232) devourer, úṣṭra buffalo, camel, and a few of questionable etymology,
as mitrá friend, putrá son, vṛtrá foe. Mitrá and vṛtrá are sometimes
neuters even in the Veda, and mitra comes later to be regularly of that
gender.
d. Feminines (in trā) are: áṣṭrā goad, mā́trā measure, hótrā sacrifice (beside hotrá\ daṃṣṭrā (later, for dáṃṣṭra); nāṣṭrā́ destroyer.
e. Not seldom, a "union-vowel" appears before the suffix; but this
is not usually the equivalent of the union-vowel used with tṛ (above,
1182 a). For the words in itra have the accent on i: thus, arítra (ári¬
tra AV., once) impelling, oar, khanitra shovel, pavitra sieve, janitra
birth-place, sanitra gift; and so -avitra, aśítra, carítra, -taritra,
dhamitra, dhavítra, bhavítra, bharítra, vāditra (with causative rootstrengthening), vahitra: the combination itra has almost won the character
of an independent suffix. The preceding vowel is also in a few cases a (sometimes apparently of the present-stem): thus, yájatra venerable, kṛntátra
shred, gāyatrá (f. -trī́) song, -damatra, pátatra wing; but also ámatra
violent, vádhatra deadly weapon; and varatrā́f. strap. Tárutra overcoming
corresponds to tarutṛ́. Nákṣatra asterism is of very doubtful etymology.
Saṁskṛtatrá (RV., once) seems of secondary formation.
f. The words still used as adjectives in tra are mostly such as have
union-vowels before the suffix. A single example from a reduplicated root
is johū́tra crying out.
g. A word or two in tri and tru may be added here, as perhaps of
kindred formation with those in tra: thus, áttri devouring, arcátri beam¬
ing, rā́tri or rā́trī night; śátru (śáttru: 232) enemy.
1186. cfí ka. The suffix Sf? ka is of very common use in
secondary derivation (below, 1222); whether it is directly
added to roots is almost questionable: at any rate, extremely
few primary derivatives are made with it.
a. The words which have most distinctly the aspect of being made
from roots are puṣka-, -meka (√mifix),yaska n. pr., śúṣka dry,
ślóka (√śru hear) noise, report, etc., and -sphāka teeming; and stúkā
flake and stoká drop seem to belong together to a root stu; rakā́ f., n.
pr., may be added.
1186—] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 450
b. But ka enters, in its value as secondary, into the composition of
certain suffixes reckoned as primary: see aka and uka (above, 1180,1181).
c. A few words in which ika and īka seem added to a root, though
they are really of a kindred formation with the preceding, may be most
conveniently noticed here: thus, vṛ́ścika (√vraśc) scorpion; ánīka (?)
face, dṛ́śīka aspect, dṛ́bhīka n. pr., mṛḍīká grace, vṛdhīká increaser,
ā́śarīka and víśarīka gripes, -ṛjīka beaming, ṛṣīka; ṛkṣī́kā; and, from
reduplicated root, parpharī́ka scattering (?). Compare secondary suffix ka
(below, 1222).
1187. 7J ya. It is altogether probable that a part of the derivatives made with this suffix are not less entitled to be ranked as
primary than some of those which are above so reckoned. Such,
however, are with so much doubt and difficulty to be separated from
the great mass of secondary derivatives made with the same suffix
that it is preferred to treat them all together under the head ofsecondary formation (below, 1210—13).
1188. ra. With this suffix are made a large number
of adjectives, almost always with weak root-form, and usually
with accent on the suffix. Also, a few words used as nouns,
of various gender. In some cases, the suffix is found with
a preceding vowel, having the aspect of a union-vowel.
a. Examples of adjectives in ra are: kṣiprá quick, chidrá split,
turá strong, bhadrá pleasing, śakrá
fmighty, śukrá bright, hiṃsrá injurious; — with accent on the root, only gṛ́dhra greedy, túmra stout,
dhī́ra wise (secondary?), vipra inspired, túgra n. pr.
b. From roots with prefixes come only an example or two: thus, ni¬
cirá attentive, nímṛgra joining on.
c. Nouns in ra are: masc, ájra field, vīrá man, vájra thunderbolt,
śū́ra hero; neut., ágra point, kṣīrá milk, rándhra hollow, riprá defile¬
ment; fem., dhā́rā stream, śíprā jaw, ßúrā intoxicating drink.
The forms of this suffix with preceding vowel may best be considered
here, although some of them have nearly or quite gained the value of independent endings. Thus:
d. With ara are made a few rare words: the adjectives dravará
running, patará flying, (with prefix) nyocará suiting; and the nouns
gambhára depth, tásara and trasara shuttle, sánara gain, -ṛkṣara
thorn: bhārvará and vāsará are doubtless of secondary formation; and
the same thing may be plausibly conjectured of others. As made with āra
may be mentioned mandāra a tree, mārjāra cat.
e. With ira are made a few words, some of which are in common
use: thus, ajirá quick, khadirá a tree, timira dark, dhvasirá stirring
up, madirá pleasing, mudira cloud, badhirá deaf, rucira bright, iṣirá
451 STEM S I N ka, ya, ra ETC. , la, va, ri, ru. [—1192
lively, ásira missile, sthávira firm; and sthira hard, and sphirá fat,
with displacement of final radical ā; also sarirá wave (usually salilá).
With īra aTe made gabhīrá or gambhīrá profound and śávīra mighty,
and perhaps śárīra body.
f. With ura are made a few words, of some of which the secondary
character is probable: thus, aṃhurá (aṃhu-ra?) narrow, ásura (ásu–ra?)
living, chidura tearing, bhaṅgurá breaking, bhāsura shining, bhidura
splitting, medura fat, yādura uniting, vithura tottering, vidura knowing,
vidhura lacking. With ūra, apparently, are made sthūrá stout (compare
sthávira), kharjū́ra a tree, mayū́ra peacock (or imitative?).
1189. la. This suffix is only another form of the
preceding, exchanging with it in certain words, in others
prevalently or solely used from their first appearance.
a. Conspicuous examples of the interchange are śuklá, sthūlá, -miśla,
śithilá, salilá.
b. Examples of the more independent use are: pālá protecting, ánila
(or aníla) wind, tṛpála joyous; later capala and tarala (said to be
accented on the final), and harṣula (the same). Many words ending in la
are of obscure etymology.
1190. 5f va. Very few words of clear derivation are
made with this suffix — too few to be worth classifying.
They are of various meaning and accent, and generally show
a weak root-form.
a. Thus: ṛkvá praising, ṛṣvá lofty, takvá quick, dhruvá fixed,
pakvá ripe, padva going, yahvá quick (?), śarvá n. pr., hrasvá short,
śikvá artful, raṇvá joyful, ūrdhvá lofty, vákva twisting, ūrvá stall;
éva quick, cours‚e, áśva horse,srákva or sṛkva corner; and perhaps
úlba caul; a feminine is prúṣvā (TS. pṛ́ṣvā, AV. pruṣvā́); with unionvowel are made saciva companion, ámīva disease, and vidhávā widov.
b. The words in va exhibit only in sporadic cases resolution of the
ending into ua.
1191. f^" ri. With this suffix are formed, directly or
with preceding u, a small number of derivatives.
a. Thus: áṅghri or aṃhri foot, áśri edge, úsri dawn, tandri or
-drī́ weariness, bhū́ri abundant, váṅkri rib, sūrí patron, -takri quick,
vádhri eunuch, śubhrí beautiful, sthúri single (team); and, with uri,
jásuri exhausted, dā́śuri pious, bhāguri n. pr., sáhuri mighty; aṅgúri
(or aṅgúli) finger.
1192. ru. This suffix makes a few adjectives and
neuter nouns, either directly or with a preceding vowel.
1192--] XVII . PRIMAR Y DERIVATION . 452
a. Thus: áśru tear, cā́ru dear, dhārú sucking, bhīrú timid; —
with preceding a-vowel: aráru inimical, patáru flying, vandā́ru praising,
píyāru scoffing, śarā́ru harming; — with preceding e, tameru relaxed,
maderú rejoicing, sanéru obtaining, himerú chilly, the evidently secondary mitréru ally, and péru (of doubtful meaning).
b. The secondary suffix lu (see 1227 b) is apparently added to certain nouns in ā from conjugation-stems, making derivatives that have a
primary aspect: thus, patayālú flying, spṛhayālu desiring.
1193. f% vi. By this suffix are made:
a. Two or three derivatives from reduplicated roots: jā́gṛvi awake,
dā́dhṛvi sustaining, dídivi shining; and a very few other words; ghṛ́ṣvi
lively, dhruvi firm, jirvi worn out (AV.; elsewhere jívri); -pharvī is
doubtful.
b. Here may be mentioned cikitvit (RV., once), apparently made
with a suffix vit from a reduplicated root-form.
1194. ^ snu. With this suffix, with or without a unionvowel, are made a few adjective derivatives from roots, but
also from causative stems.
a. From simple roots: direct, kṣeṣṇú perishable, -glāsnu sick, jiṣṇú
victorious, daṅkṣṇú biting, bhūṣṇu thriving, ni-ṣatsnú sitting down,
sthāsnu fixed; with union-vowel i, kariṣṇu, kāśiṣṇu, kṣayiṣṇu, ga¬
miṣṇú, grasiṣnu, grahiṣṇu, cariṣṇú, -janiṣṇu, jayiṣṇu, tapiṣṇu,
-trapiṣṇu, -patiṣṇu, -bhaviṣṇu, bhrājiṣṇu, madiṣṇu, -maviṣṇu,
yajiṣṇu, yāciṣṇu, -vadiṣṇu, vardhiṣṇu, -sahiṣṇu.
b. From secondary conjugation-stems: kopayiṣṇu, kṣapayiṣṇu,
cyāvayiṣṇú, janayiṣṇu, tāpayiṣṇu, namayiṣṇu, patayiṣṇu, poṣa¬
yiṣṇú, pārayiṣṇú, bodhayiṣṇu, mādayiṣṇu, yamayiṣṇú, ropayiṣṇu,
-vārayiṣṇu, -śocayiṣṇú; and jāgariṣṇu. An anomalous formation is
ulbanisṇu.
c. These derivatives are freely compounded with prefixes: e. g.
niṣatsnú, prajaniṣṇú, abhiśocayiṣṇú, saṁvārayisṇu.
d. It is not unlikely that the s of this suffix is originally that of a
stem, to which nu was added. Such a character is still apparent in kra¬
viṣṇú craving raw flesh (kravis); and also in vadhasnú, vṛdhasnú (?),
and prathasnu (?).
1195. «na. Extremely few words have this ending,
a. It is seen in tīkṣṇá sharp, and perhaps in ślokṣṇá, -rūkṣṇá,
-mārtsna; and in geṣṇa and deṣṇá (usually trisyllabic: daīṣṇa) gift.
Unless in the last, it is not found preceded by i ; but it has (like snu,
above) a before it in vadhasná deadly weapon, karásna fore-arm; na¬
dīṣṇa skilled seems to be secondary. Feminines are mṛtsnā loam, jyot¬
snā moonlight
453 STEM S I N ru, vi, snu, sna, tnu, sa, asi, abha, E TC . [—1201
1196.
—
tnu. This suffix is used in nearly the same way
with ^ snu (above, 1194).
a. As used with simple roots, the t is generally capable of being
-considered the adscititious t after a short root-final, to which nu is then
added: thus, kṛtnú active, gatnú (? RV.), hatnú deadly, -tatnu (?) stretching; and, from reduplicated roots, jigatnú hasting, and jighatnú harming; but also dartnú bursting. Also, with union-vowel, dravitnú running, dayitnu (? LŚS.).
b. With causative stems: for example, drāvayitnú hasting, poṣay¬
itnú nourishing, mādayitnú intoxicating, tanayitnú and stanayitnú
thunder, sūdayitnú flowing, -āmayitnú sickening.
c. With preceding a, in pīyatnú scoffing, mehatnú a river, ā-ru¬
jatnú breaking into; and kavatnú miserly (obscure derivation).
1197. H sa. The words ending in suffixal FT sa, with or
without preceding union-vowel, are a heterogeneous group, and in
considerable part of obscure derivation. Thus:
a. With sa simply: gṛtsa clever, jeṣá winning (rather, aoristic sP
1148j), -dṛkṣa looking, rukṣá shining, rūkṣá rough; útsa n. fountain;
bhīṣā́ f. fear (or from the secondary root bhīṣ).
b. With preceding i-vowel: taviṣá (f. táviṣī) strong, mahiṣá (f.
máhiṣī) mighty, bhariṣá (?) seeking booty; ṛjīṣá rushing, púrīṣa rubbish,
manīṣā́ f. devotion'; and compare rayīṣín (? SV.).
c. With preceding u-vowel: aruṣá (f. áruṣī) red, aśúṣa ravenous,
táruṣa overcomer, púruṣa and mánuṣa (-us-a?) man; pīyū́ṣa biestings.
1198. ^fśī asI. A few words in the oldest language are made
with a suffix having this form (perhaps produced by the addition of
i to as).
a. Thus, atasi vagabond, dhamasi firm, sānasí winning; and
dhāsí m. drink, f. station, sarasi (?) pool.
1199. W{ abha. A few names of animals, forthe most part
of obscure derivation, show this ending.
a. Thus, vṛṣabhá and ṛṣabhá bull, śarabhá a certain fabulous
animal, śerabha a certain snake, gardabhá and rā́sabha ass; further,
kanabha, karabha and kalabha, laṭabha, śalabha; and, with other
union-vowels, tuṇḍibha, nuṇḍibha, and kukkubha. The feminine, if
occurring, is in ī; and kaṭabhī is found without corresponding masculine.
A V. has the adjective sthūlabhá, equivalent to sthūlá.
1200. Afew words ending in the consonants t, d, j , etc., and
for the most part of doubtful root-connections, were given above, at
883k (3 - 5,7); it is unnecessary to repeat them here. Certain of those
in at are perhaps related to the participles in ant (1172).
1201. A number of other primary suffixes are either set up by
1201-—] XYH . SECONDAR Y DERIVATION , 454
the grammarians and supported with examples of questionable value,
or are doubtfully deducible from isolated words traceable to known
roots, or from words of obscure connection.
a. A few such may be mentioned here: aṇḍa in karaṇḍa and vá–
raṇḍa and certain unquotable words (prakritized a-forms from the present
participle); era and ora in unquotable words, and elima (above, 966d :
perhaps a further derivative with secondary ima from era); mara (ma or
man with secondary ra added) in ghasmara, sṛmará, etc.; — sara in
matsará, kara in púṣkara and other obscure words, pa in púṣpa,
stupá, stū́pa, and a number of other obscure words; and so on.
B. Secondary Derivatives.
1202. Words of secondary derivation are made by the
addition of further suffixes to stems already ending in evident suffixes.
a. But also, as pointed out above (1137 b), to pronominal roots.
b. Further, in exceptional cases, to indeclinables, to case-forms, and
to phrases: e. g. antarvant, apitvá, paratastva, sahatva, sārva¬
trika, āikadhya, mā́maka, āmuṣmika, āmusyāyaṇá, apsumánt,
apsavyà, kiṁcanya, kiṁkartavyata, kvācitka, nastika, akiṁcin¬
maya.
1203. Changes of the stem. The stem to which
the suffix is added is liable to certain changes of form.
a. Before a suffix beginning with a vowel or with y (which in this
respect is treated as if it were i), final a- and i-vowels are regularly lost
altogether, while a final u-vowel has the guṇa-strengthening and becomes av; ṛ and o and āu (all of rare occurrence) are treated in accordance with usual euphonic rule.
b. An u-vowel also sometimes remains unstrengthened: see 1208e.
c. A final n is variously treated, being sometimes retained, and
sometimes lost, even along with a preceding a; and sometimes an a
is lost, while the n remains: thus, vṛṣoṇvant, vṛṣaṇa, vṛṣa, vṛṣatva,
vṛṣṇya, from vṛṣan. Of a stem ending in ant, the weak form, in at,
is regularly taken: thus, vāivasvata (vivasvant),
d. In general, the masculine form of a primitive stem is that from
which a further secondary derivative is made. But there are not very rare
cases in which the feminine is taken instead; examples are satītva,
bhāryātva, pranītātvá, bhāratīvant, rakṣāvant, priyāvant. On the
other hand, a final long vowel — Ī, much more rarely ā — generally of a
feminine stem, is sometimes shortened in derivation: thus, yājyàvant,
praśàkhavont, goṣátama, vaśátamā, sadhanitvá, jaratikā, annā-
455 CHANGE S OF STEM . [—1204
dítamā (cf. 471b), rohinitvá (TB.; -nītvá ŚB.), pṛthivitvá, prati¬
patnivat, sárasvativant.
e. As was pointed out above (111c, d), the combination of a secondary suffix with a stem is sometimes made according to the rules of
external combination. Such cases are pointed out under the suffixes īya
(1215e), ka (1222m), maya (1225a), min (1231b), vin (1232c),
vant (1233i), van (1234c), mant (1235f), tva (1239c), taya
(1245 a), tya (1245 c), tana (1245 i).
1204. The most frequent change in secondary derivation
is the vṛddhi-strengthening of an initial syllable of the stem
to which a suffix is added.
a. The strengthened syllable may be of any character: radical,
of a prefix, or of the first member of a compound: thus, āśviná
(aśvín), sāumyá (sóma), pā́rthiva (pṛthivī́), āmitrá (amítra), sā́m¬
rājya (samrā́j), sāúkṛtya (sukṛtá), māitrāvaruṇá (mitrā́váruṇā),
āuccaiḥśravasá (uccāíḥśravas). As to the accompanying accent,
see the next paragraph.
b. If a stem begins with a consonant followed by y or v, the semivowel is sometimes vriddhied, as if it were i or u, and the resulting āi
or āu has y or v further added before the succeeding vowel.
c. This is most frequent where the y or v belongs to a prefix — as
ni, vi, su — altered before a following initial vowel: thus, nāiyāyika
from nyāya (as if niyāya), vāiyaśvá from vyàśva (as if viyaśva),
sāúvaśvya from sváśva (as if suvaśva); but it occurs also in other
cases, as sāuvará from svára, śāuva from śvan, against svāyambhuva
(svayambhū), and so on. AV. has irregularly kāveraká from kúvera
(as if from kvêra, without the euphonic y inserted).
d. This strengthening takes place especially, and very often, before
the suffixes a and ya; also regularly before i, āyana, eya (with ineya),
and later īya; before the compound aka and ika, and later aki; and,
in single sporadic examples before, na, ena, ra, and tva (?): see these
various suffixes below.
e. Sometimes an unstrengthened word is prefixed to one thus strengthened, as if the composition were made after instead of before the strengthening: e. g. indradāivatya having Indra as divinity (instead of āin¬
dradevatya), caramaśāirṣika wifh head to the west, jīvalāukika belonging to the world of the living, antarbhāuma within the earth, somā¬
rāudra, gurulāghava (cf. tāmasaṁ guṇalakṣaṇam M. xii. 35).
But especially when the first word is of numeral value: as śatáśārada
of a hundred years, pañcaśāradíya, trisāṁvatsora, bahuvārṣika,
aṣṭavārṣika, anekavarsasāhasra, daśasāhasra, trisāhasrī, tripāu¬
ruṣa, caturādhyāyī or -yikā of four chapters, etc. etc.
1204-— ] XVII . SECONDAR Y DERIVATION . 456
f. More often, both members of a compound word have the initial
strengthening: e. g. sāumāpāuṣṇá, kāúrupāñcāla, cāturvāidya,
āihalāukika, āikabhāutika, trāisṭubjāgata, yājurvāidika. Such
cases are not rare.
g. Theguṇa-strengthening(except of a final u-vowel: 1203a) is
only in the rarest cases an accompaniment of secondary derivation. Exceptions are dvayá aud trayá and náva (1209i), bheṣajá and devá
(1209 j), dróna (1223g), śekhara (1226a),
1205. Accent, a. The derivatives with initial vṛddhi-strength¬
ening always have their accent on either the first or the last syllable.
And usually it is laid, as between these two situations, in such a
way as to be furthest removed from the accent of the primitive; yet,
not rarely, it is merely drawn down upon the suffix from the final of
the latter; much less often, it remains upon an initial syllable without
change. Only in the case of one or two suffixes is the distinction
between initial and final accent connected with any difference in the
meaning and use of the derivatives (see below, suffix eya: 1216).
b. No other general rules as to accent can be given. Usually
the suffix takes the tone, or else this remains where it was in the
primitive; quite rarely, it is thrown back to the initial syllable (as in
derivation with initial vṛddhi); and in a single case (tā: 1237) it is
drawn down to the syllable preceding the suffix.
1206. Meaning, a. The great mass of secondary suffixes are
adjective-making: they form from nouns adjectives indicating appurtenance or relation, of the most indefinite and varied character. But,
as a matter of course, this indefiniteness often undergoes specialization : so, particularly, into designation of procedure or descent, so
that distinctive patronymic and metronymic and gentile words are the
result; or, again, into the designation of possession. Moreover,
while the masculines and feminines of such adjectives are employed
as appellatives, the neuter is also widely used as an abstract, denoting the quality expressed attributively by the adjective; and neuter
abstracts are with the same suffixes made from adjectives. There
are also special suffixes (very few) by which abstracts are made directly, from adjective or noun.
b. A few suffixes make no change in the part of speech of the
primitive, but either change its degree (diminution and comparison),
or make other modifications, or leave its meaning not sensibly altered.
1207. The suffixes will be taken up below in the following
order. First, the general adjective-making suffixes, beginning with
those of most frequent use (a‚ ya and its connections, i , ka); then,
those of specific possessive value (in, vant and mant, and their connections); then, the abstract-making ones (tā and tva, and their connections); then, the suffixes of comparison etc.; and finally, those by
which derivatives are made only or almost only from particles.
457 STEM S I N a. [—1208
a. For convenience of reference, a list of them in their order as
treated is here added:
a 1208—9 maya 1225 tva, tvatā 1239
ya 1210—13 ra, ira, etc. 1226 tvana 1240
iya 1214 la, lu 1227 tara, tama 1242
īya 1215 va, vala, vaya, ra, ma »
eya, eyya 1216 vya 1228 tha »
enya 1217 śa 1229 titha »
āyya 1218 in 1230 taya 1245
āyana 1219 min 1231 tya »
āyī 1220 vin 1232 ta »
i, aki 1221 vant 1233 na
ka, aka, ika 1222 van 1234 tana, tna »
na, āna, īna, mant 1235 vat »
ina, ena 1223 tā 1237 kaṭa »
ma, ima, mna 1224 tāti, tat 1238 vana, āla »
1208. t% a. With this suffix are made an immensely
large class of derivatives, from nouns or from adjectives
having a noun-value. Such derivatives are primarily and
especially adjectives, denoting having a relation or connection
(of the most various kind) with that denoted by the more
primitive word. But they are also freely used substantively:
the masculine and feminine as appellatives, the neuter, especially and frequently, as abstract. Often they have a
patronymic or gentile value.
a. The regular and greatly prevailing formation is that which
is accompanied with vṛddhi-strengthening of the first syllable of
the primitive word, simple or compound. Examples of this formation are:
b. From primitives ending in consonants: with the usual shift of
accent, āyasá of metal (áyas), mānasá relating to the mind (mánas),
sāumanasá friendliness (sumánas), brāhmaṇá priest (bráhman), hāi¬
mavatá from the Himalaya (himávant), āṅgirasá of the Angiras family
(áṅgiras); hā́stina elephantine (hastin), mā́ruta pertaining to the Maruts
(marút); — with accent thrown forward from the final upon the suffix,
śāradá autumnal, vāirājá relating to the virā́j, pāuṣṇá belonging to
PÜ8hán; gāirikṣitá son of Girikshft; — with accent unchanged, manuṣa
descendant of Mdnus.
c. The suffix is added (as above instanced) to the middle stem-form
of stemsin vant; it is added to the weakestin mā́ghona and vā́rtraghna;
the ending in remains unchanged; an usually does the same, but some-
1204— ] XVII . SECONDAR Y DERIVATION . 456
f. More often, both members of a compound word have the initial
strengthening: e. g. sāumāpāuṣṇá, kāúrupāñcāla, cāturvāidya,
āihalāukika, āikabhāutika, trāisṭubjāgata, yājurvāidika. Such
cases are not rare.
g. The guṇa-strengthening (except of a final u-vowel: 1203 a) is
only in the rarest cases an accompaniment of secondary derivation. Exceptions are dvayá aud trayá and náva (1209i), bheṣajá and devá
(1209 j), dróna (1223g), śekhara (1226a),
1205. Accent, a. The derivatives with initial vṛddhi-strength¬
ening always have their accent on either the first or the last syllable.
And usually it is laid, as between these two situations, in such a
way as to be furthest removed from the accent of the primitive; yet,
not rarely, it is merely drawn down upon the suffix from the final of
the latter; much less often, it remains upon an initial syllable without
change. Only in the case of one or two suffixes is the distinction
between initial and final accent connected with any difference in the
meaning and use of the derivatives (see below, suffix eya: 1216).
b. No other general rules as to accent can be given. Usually
the suffix takes the tone, or else this remains where it was in the
primitive; quite rarely, it is thrown back to the initial syllable (as in
derivation with initial vṛddhi); and in a single case (tā: 1237) it is
drawn down to the syllable preceding the suffix.
1206. Meaning, a. The great mass of secondary suffixes are
adjective-making: they form from nouns adjectives indicating appurtenance or relation, of the most indefinite and varied character. But,
as a matter of course, this indefiniteness often undergoes specialization : so, particularly, into designation of procedure or descent, so
that distinctive patronymic and metronymic and gentile words are the
result; or, again, into the designation of possession. Moreover,
while the masculines and feminines of such adjectives are employed
as appellatives, the neuter is also widely used as an abstract, denoting the quality expressed attributively by the adjective; and neuter
abstracts are with the same suffixes made from adjectives. There
are also special suffixes (very few) by which abstracts are made directly, from adjective or noun.
b. A few suffixes make no change in the part of speech of the
primitive, but either change its degree (diminution and comparison),
or make other modifications, or leave its meaning not sensibly altered.
1207. The suffixes will be taken up below in the following
order. First, the general adjective-making suffixes, beginning with
those of most frequent use (a, ya and its connections, i , ka); then,
those of specific possessive value (in, vant and mant, and their connections); then, the abstract-making ones (tā and tva, and their connections); then, the suffixes of comparison etc.; and finally, those by
which derivatives are made only or almost only from particles.
457 STEM S I N a. [—1208
a. For convenience of reference, a list of them in their order as
treated is here added:
1208. a. With this suffix are made an immensely
large class of derivatives, from nouns or from adjectives
having a noun-value. Such derivatives are primarily and
especially adjectives, denoting having a relation or connection
(of the most various kind) with that denoted by the more
primitive word. But they are also freely used substantively:
the masculine and feminine as appellatives, the neuter, especially and frequently, as abstract. Often they have a
patronymic or gentile value.
a. The regular and greatly prevailing formation is that which
is accompanied with vṛddhi-strengthening of the first syllable of
the primitive word, simple or compound. Examples of this formation are:
b. From primitives ending in consonants: with the usual shift of
accent, āyasá of metal (áyas), mānasá relating to the mind (mánas),
sāumanasá friendliness (sumánas), brāhmaṇá priest (bráhman), hāi¬
mavatá from the Himalaya (himávant), āṅgirasá of the Angiras family
(áṅgiras); hā́stina elephantine (hastin), mā́ruta pertaining to the Maruts
(marút); — with accent thrown forward from the final upon the suffix,
śāradá autumnal, vāirājá relating to the virā́j, pāusṇá belonging to
PÜ8hán; gāirikṣitá son of Girikshft; — with accent unchanged, manuṣa
descendant of Mdnus.
c. The suffix is added (as above instanced) to the middle stem-form
of stemsin vant; it is added to the weakestin mā́ghona and vā́rtraghna;
the ending in remains unchanged; an usually does the same, but somea 1208—9 maya 1225 tva, tvatā 1239
ya 1210—13 ra, ira, etc. 1226 tvana 1240
iya 1214 la, lu 1227 tara, tama 1242
lya 1215 va, vala, vaya, ra, ma »
eya, eyya 1216 vya 1228 tha »
enya 1217 śa 1229 titha »
āyya 1218 in 1230 taya 1245
āyana 1219 min 1231 tya »
āyī 1220 vin 1232 ta »
i, aki 1221 vant 1233 na »
ka, aka, ika 1222 van 1234 tana, tna »
na, āna, īna, mant 1235 vat »
ina, ena 1223 tā 1237 kaṭa »
ma, ima, mna 1224 tāti, tat 1238 vana, āla »
[—1208 XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 458
times loses its a, as in pāuṣṇà, trāivṛsṇá, dāśarājñá; and sometimes
its n, as in brāhmá, āukṣá, bārhatsāma.
d. From primitives in ṛ: jāítra victorious (jetṛ́ or jétṛ conqueror),
tvāṣṭrá relating to Tváshtar, sāvitrá descendant of the sun (savitṛ́),
āúdbhetra, pāitra.
e. From primitivesin u: usually with guṇa-strengthening of the u,
as vāsavá relating to the Vásus, ārtavá concerning the seasons (ṛtú),
dānavá child of Dānu (dā́nu), sāindhavá from the Indus (sindhu);
— but sometimes without, as mā́dhva full of sweets (mádhu), pārśvá
side (párśu rib), pāidvá belonging to Pedú, tā́nva of the body (tanū́),
yā́dva of Yádu.
f. From primitives in i and ī, which vowels are supplanted by the
added suffix: pā́rthiva earthly (pṛthivī́), sārasvatá of the Sárasvatī,
āindrāgná belonging to Jndra and Agni (indrāgnī́); pā́ṅkta five-fold
(paṅktí), nāirṛtá belonging to Nirṛti, pārthuraśmá of Prthuraśmi, pā¬
śupatá of Paśupáti.
g. From primitivesin ā‚ which in like manner disappears: yāmuná
of the Yamúnā, sāraghá honey etc. (sarághā bee), kānīná natural
child (kanī́nā girl).
h. A large number (more than all the rest together) from primitives
in a‚ of which the final is replaced by the suffix: for example, with the
usual shift of accent, āmitrá inimical (amitra enemy), vāruṇá of Váruṇa,
vāiśvadevá belonging to all the gods (viśvádeva), nāirhastá handless¬
ness (nírhasta), vāiyaśvá descendant of Vyhśva; gā́rdabha asinine
(gardabhá), dāíva divine (devá), mā́dhyaṁdina meridional (madh¬
yáṁdina), pāútra grandchild (putrá son), sāúbhaga good fortune (su¬
bhága), vā́dhryaśva of Vadhryaśvtis race; with unchanged accent (comparatively few), vāsantá vernal (vasantá spring), māitrá Mitrá's,
ātithigvá of Atithigvā's race, dāívodāsa Dívodāsas. In a few instances,
ya is replaced by the suffix: thus, sāura, pāuṣá, yājñavalka.
i. The derivatives of this last form are sometimes regarded as made by
internal change, without added suffix. Considering, however, that other
final vowels are supplanted by this suffix, that a disappears as stem-final
also before various other suffixes of secondary derivation, and that no examples of derivation without suffix are quotable from primitives of any
other final than a, it seems far too violent to assume here a deviation from
the whole course of Indo-European word-making.
j . Adjectives of this formation make their feminines in ī (see 832 a).
1209. The derivatives made by adding -Sf a without
vṛddhi-change of the initial syllable are not numerous, and
are in considerable part, doubtless, of inorganic make, results
of the transfer to an a-declension of words of other finals.
459 STEM S I N a, ya. [—1210
a. A number of examples of stems in a made by transfer were noticed above (399). The cases of such transition occur most frequently in
composition (1315): thus, further, apa- (for ap or āp water), -ṛca, -nara,
etc.; from stems in an, -aha, -vṛṣa, etc, but also -ahna and -vṛṣṇa
and vṛ́ṣaṇa; from stems in i , -aṅgula, -rātra, etc.; from the weakest
forms of añc-stems (407) uccá, nīcá, parācá, etc.
b. Also occurring especially in composition, yet likewise as simple
words often enough to have an independent aspect, are derivatives in a
from nouns in as (rarely is, us): thus, for example, tamasá, rajasá,
payasá, brahmavarcasá, sarvavedasá, devāinasá, paruṣá, tryāyuṣá,
and probably mánuṣa.
c. Similar derivatives from adjectives, in in are reckoned by the
grammarians as made with the suffix ina: thus, malina polluted, para¬
meṣṭhína etc. (see 441b).
d. A number of words formed with the so-called suffix anta are evident transfers from stems in ant. A few of them are found even from
the earliest period: thus, panta draught, śvāntá (?), vasantá spring,
hemantá winter, veśantá etc. tank, jīvontī́ a certain healing plant; and
others occur later, as jayanta, tar anta, madhumanta, etc. They are
said to be accented on the final.
e. From añc-stems (407) are made a few nouns ending in k-a:
thus, ánūka, ápāka, upaka, prátīka, parāká, etc.
f. From stems in ṛ, hotrá, netrá, neṣṭrá, potrá, praśāstrá, etc.,
from titles of priests; also dhātrá, bhrātrá, etc.
g. Other scattering cases are: savidyutá, āvyuṣá, vī́rudha, ká¬
kuda, kakubhá, aśúṣa, bhūmyá, sakhyá, ádhipatya, jāspatyá,
araṭvá, pānḍvà.
h. The Vedic gerundives in tva (tua), made by addition of a to
abstract noun-stems in tu, have been already (966 a) fully given.
i. Trayá and dvayá come withguṇa-strengtheningfrom numeral
stems; náva new in like manner from nú now; and ántara apparently
from antár.
j . Bheṣajá medicine is from bhiṣáj healer, with guṇa-change; and
probably devá heavenly, divine, god, in like manner from div sky, heaven
(there is no "root div shine" in the language).
1210. ET ya. With this suffix are made a very large
class of words, both in the old language and later.
a. The derivatives in ya exhibit a great and perplexing variety of
form, connection, and application; and the relations of the suffix to others
containing a ya-element — iya, īya, eya, āyya, eyya, enya — are
also in part obscure and difficult. In the great majority of instances in
the oldest language, the ya when it follows a consonant is dissyllabic in
1210—] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 460
metrical value, or is to be read as ia. Thus, in RV., 266 words (excluding
compounds) have ia, and only 75 have ya always; 46 are to be read now
with ia and now with ya, but many of these have ya only in isolated
cases. As might be expected, the value ia is more frequent after a heavy
syllable: thus, in RV., there are 188 examples of ia and 27 of ya after
such a syllable, and 78 of ia and 96 of ya after a light syllable (the
circumflexed yà — that is to say, ia — being, as is pointed out below,
12121, more liable to the resolution than ya or yá). It must be left for
further researches to decide whether in the ya are not included more than
one suffix, with different accent, and different quantity of the i-element;
or with an a added to a final i of the primitive. It is also matter for
question whether there is a primary as well as a secondary suffix ya; the
suffix at least comes to be used as if primary, in the formation of gerundives and in that of action-nouns: but it is quite impossible to separate
the derivatives into two such classes, and it has seemed preferable therefore to treat them all together here.
b. The derivatives made with ya may be first divided into those
which do and those which do not show an accompanying vṛddhiincrement of the initial syllable.
0. Adjectives in ya, of both these divisions, make their feminines
regularly in yā. But in a number of cases, a feminine in ī is made,
either alone or beside one in yā: e. g. cāturmāsī, āgniveśī, śāṇḍilī,
ā́rī (and ā́ryā), dāívī (and dāívyā), sāumī (and sāumyā); dhīrī́,
śīrṣaṇī, svarī, etc.
1211. Derivatives in ET ya with initial vṛddhi-strengthening follow quite closely, in form and meaning, the analogy
of those in ET a (above, 1208). They are, however, decidedly
less common than the latter (in Veda, about three fifths as
many).
a. Examples are: with the usual shift of accent, dāívya divine
(devá), pā́litya grayness (palitá), grāívya cervical (grīvā́), ā́rtvijya
priestly office (ṛtvíj), gā́rhapatya householder's (gṛhápati), jā́narājya
kingship Qanarā́j), sā́ṁgrāmajitya victory in battle (saṁgrāmajít),
sāúvaśvya wealth in horses (sváśva), āúpadraṣṭrya witness (upa¬
draṣṭṛ́); ādityá Aditya (áditi), sāumyá relating to sôma, ātithyá hospitality (átithi), prājāpatyá belonging to Prajāpati, vāimanasyá mindlessness (vímanas), sā́hadevya descendant of Sáhádeva; — with accent
thrown forward from thefinalupon the ending, lāukyá of the world (loká),
kāvyá of the Kavi-race, ārtvyá descendant of Ritú, vāyavyá belonging
to the wind (vāyú), rāivatyá wealth (revánt); — with unchanged accent (very few), ā́dhipatya lordship (ádhipati), śrāíṣṭhya excellence
(śréṣṭha), vāíśya belonging to the third class (víś people), pāúṁsya
manliness (púṁs).
461 STEM S I N ya. [—1212
b. The AV. has once nāirbādhyà, with circumflexed final; if not
an error, it is doubtless made through nāirbādha; vāiṣṇavyāù (VS. i .
12) appears to be dualfem.of vāiṣṇavī́.
1212, Derivatives in TJ ya without initial vṛddhistrengthening are usually adjectives, much less often (neuter,
or, in 7JĪ yā, feminine) abstract nouns. They are made from
every variety of primitive, and are very numerous (in Veda,
three or four times as many as the preceding class).
a. The general mass of these words may be best divided according to their accent, into: I. Words retaining the accent ofthe primitive; 2. Words with retracted accent; 3. Words with acute yá (iá);
4. Words with circumflexed yà (ia). Finally may be considered the
words, gerundives andaction-nouns, which have the aspect of primary
derivatives.
1. b. Examples of derivatives in ya retaining the accent of their
primitives are : áśvya equine (áśva), áṅgya of the limbs (áṅga), múkh¬
ya foremost (múkha mouth), ávya ovine (ávi), gávya bovine (go),
víśya of the people (víś), dúrya of the door (dúr), nárya manly (nṛ́),
vṛ́ṣṇya virile (vṛ́ṣan), svarā́jya autocracy (svarā́j), suvī́rya wealth in
retainers (suvī́ra), viśvájanya of all men, viśvádevya of oll the gods
(viśvádeva), mayū́raśepya peacock-tailed.
c. In the last words, and in a few others, the ya appears to be used
(like ka, 1222h: of. 1212m) as a suffix simply helping to make a
possessive compound: and so further suhástya (beside the equivalent
suhásta), mádhuhastya, dáśamāsya, miśrádhānya, anyódarya,
samānodarya.
2. d. Examples with retraction of the accent to the first syllable (as
in derivation with vṛddhi-increment) are: káṇṭhya guttural (kaṇṭhá),
skándhya humeral (skandhá), vrátya of a ceremony (vratá), méghya
in the clouds (meghá), pitrya of the Fathers (pitṛ́), prátijanya adverse
(pratijaná). Hiraṇyáya of gold (híraṇya), is anomalous both in drawing the accent forward and in retaining the final a of the primitive; and
gavyáya and avyáya (also ávyaya) are to be compared with it as to
formation.
3. e. Examples with acute accent on the suffix are: divyá heavenly
(div), satyá true (sánt), vyāghryá tigrine (vyāghrá), kavyá wise
(kaví), grāmyá of the village (grā́ma), somyá relating to the s6ma,
anenasyá sinlessness (anenás), adakṣiṇyá notfitfor dákṣiṇā.
4. f. Of derivatives ending in circumflexed yà (which in the Veda are
considerably more numerous than all the three preceding classes together),
examples are as follows:
1212—-] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 462
g. From consonant-stems: viśyà of the clan (RV.: víś), hṛdyà
of the heart (hṛ́d), vidyutyà of the lightning (vidyút), rājanyà of the
royal class (rā́jan), doṣaṇyà of the arm (doṣán), śīrṣaṇyà of the head
(śīrṣán), karmaṇyà active (kárman), dhanvanyà of the plain (dhán¬
van), namasya reuerend (námas), tvacasyà cuticular (tvácas), bar¬
hiṣya of barhis, āyuṣy^, giving life (ā́yus), bhasadya of the buttocks
(bhasád), prācyà eastern (prā́ñc), etc. Of exceptional formation is ar¬
yamya intimate (aryamán), with which doubtless belong sātmya (sāt¬
man) and sākṣya (sākṣin).
h. From u-stems: hanavyà of the jaws (hánu), vāyavyà belonging
to Vāyú, paśavyà relating to cattle (paśú), iṣavyà relating to arrows
(íṣu), madhavyà of the sweet (mádhu), apsavyà of the waters (apsú
loc), rajjavyà of rope (rájju); śaravyā̀ f. arrow (śáru, do,); and there
may be added nāvyà navigable (especially infem.,nāvyā̀navigable stream:
nāú boat). The RV. has prāśavyà to be partaken of (pra+√aś), without any corresponding noun prāśu; and also ūrjavyà rich in nourishment (ūrj), without any intermediate ūrju.
i. Under this head belong, as was pointed out above (964), the socalled gerundives in tavyà, as made by the addition of yà to the infinitive
noun in tu. They are wholly wanting in the oldest language, and hardly
found in later Vedic, although still later tavya wins the value of a.primary suffix, and makes numerous verbal derivatives.
j . From i- and ī-stems hardly any examples are to be quoted. VS.
has dundubhyà from dundubhi.
k. From a-stems: svargyà heavenly (svargá), devatyk relating to
a deity (devátā), prapathyk guiding (prapathá), budhnyà fundamental (budhná), jaghanya hindmost (jaghána), varuṇya Váruna's,
vīrya might (vīrá), udaryà abdominal (udára), utsyà of the fountain
(útsa); and from ā-stems, urvaryà of cultivated land (urvárā), svāhyà
relating to the exclamation svā́hā.
I. The circumflexed yà is more generally resolved (into ia) than the
other forms of the suffix: thus, in RV. it is never to be read as ya after
a heavy syllable ending with a consonant; and even after a light one it
becomes ia in more than three quarters of the examples.
m. There are a few cases in which yà appears to be used to help
make a compound with governing preposition (next chapter, 1310: cf.
1212 c): thus, apikakṣyà about the arm-pit, upapakṣyà upon the sides,
11dāpyà up-stream; and perhaps upatṛṇyà lying in the grass (occurs only
in voc). But, with other accent, ánvōntrya through the entrails, úpa¬
māsya in each month, abhinabhyá up to the clouds, antaḥparśavyá
between the ribs, ádhigartya on the chariot seat; of unknown accent, adhi¬
hastya, anupṛṣṭhya, anunāsikya, anuvaṃśya.
1213. The derivatives in If ya as to which it may be
463 STEM S I N ya. [—1213
questioned whether they are not, a least in part, primary
derivatives from the beginning, are especially the gerundives, together with action-nouns coincident with these in
form; in the later language, the gerundive-formation (above,
963) comes to be practically a primary one.
a. In RV. occur about forty instances of gerundives in ya, of tolerably accordant form: the root usually unstrengthened (but cétya, bhávya,
-hávya, márjya, yódhya; also -mā́dya, -vā́cya, bhāvyá); the accent
on the radical syllable when the word is simple, or compounded with prepositions: thus, praśásya, upasádya, vihávya (but usually on the final
after the negative prefix: thus, anāpyá, anapavṛjyá) — exceptions are
only bhāvyá and the doubtful ākāyyà; the ya resolved into ia in the
veTy great majority of occurrences; a final short vowel followed by t (in
-ítya, -kṛtya, -śrútya, -stútya, and the reduplicated carkṛ́tya, beside
carkṛ́ti: not in návya and -hávya), and ā changed to e (in -deya
only). If regarded as secondary, they might be made with ya, in accordance with other formations by this suffix, in part from the root-noun, as
anukṛ́t-ya, in part from derivatives in a, as bhāvyá (from bhāva).
b. The AV. has a somewhat smaller number (about twenty-five) of
words of a like formation; but also a considerable group (fifteen) of derivatives in yà with; the same value: thus, for example, ādyà eatable, kār¬
yà to be done, samāpya to be obtained, atitāryà to be overpassed,
nīvibhāryà to be carried in the apron, prathamavāsyà to befirstworn.
These seem more markedly of secondary origin: and especially such forms
as parivargyà to be avoided, avimokyá not to be gotten rid of, where
the guttural reversion clearly indicates primitives in ga and ka (216 h).
c. Throughout the older language are of common occurrence neuter
abstract nouns of the same make with the former of these classes. They
are rarely found except in composition (in AV., only citya and stéya as
simple), and are often used in the dative, after the manner of a dative
infinitive. Examples are: brahmajyéya, vasudéya, bhāgadhéya,
pūrvapéya, śataséya, abhibhū́ya, devahū́ya, mantraśrútya, kar¬
makṛ́tya, vṛtratū́rya, hotṛvū́rya, ahihátya, sattrasádya, śīrṣa¬
bhídya, brahmacárya, nṛṣáhya. Of exceptional form are ṛtódya (√vad)
and sahaśéyya (√śī); of exceptional accent, sadhástutya. And AV.
has one example, raṇyà, with circumflexed final.
d. Closely akin with these, in meaning and use, is a smaller class
of feminines in yā́: thus, kṛtyā́, vidyā́, ityā́, agnicityā́, vājojityā́,
muṣṭihatyā́, devayajyā́, etc.
e. There remain, of course, a considerable number of less classifiable
words, both nouns and adjectives, of which a few from the older language
may be mentioned, without discussion of their relations: thus, Bū́rya (with
1213—] XVII SECONDARY DERIVATION. 464
fem. sūryā́), ā́jya, púṣya , nábhya ; yújya, gṛ́dhya, írya , ary á and
ā́rya, márya , mádhya .
The suffixes apparently most nearly akin with ya may best be
next taken up
1214. iya. This suffix is virtually identical with
the preceding, being but another written form of the same
thing It is used only after two consonants, where the
direct addition of TJ ya would create a combination of difficult utterance. It has the same variety of accent with ya.
Thus
a. With accent iya (= ia or yà): for example, abhriya (also abh¬
riya) from the clouds (abhrá), kṣatríya having authority (kṣatrá),
yajñíya reverend (yajñá), hotríy a libational (hótrā), amitríy a inimical
(amítra).
b. With accent ìyá ( = iá or yá) : for example, agriyá (also agríya)
foremost (ágra), indriy á Indra s (later, sense índra), kṣetriy á of the
-field (kṣetra).
O. With accent on the primitive śrótriy a learned (śrótra), ṛ́tviya
(also ṛtvíya ) in season (ṛtú).
1215. <~T īya . This suffix also is apparently by origin a ya
(īa) of which the first element has maintained its long quantity by the
interposition of a euphonic y. It is accented always on the Í.
a. In RV. occur, of general adjectives, only ārjikī́ya and gṛhame¬
dhī́ya, and examples in the later Vedic are very few e g parvatī́ya
mountainous (AV, beside RV parvatyà). In the Brāhmanas are found
a number of adjectives, some of them from phrases (first words of verses
and the like) thus, anyarāṣṭrī́ya, pañcavātī́ya, mārjālī́ya, kayā¬
śubhīya, svāduṣkilīya, āpohiṣṭhīya, etc.
b. It was pointed out above (965) that derivative adjectives in īya
from action-nouns in ana begin in later Veda and in Brāhmaṇa to be
used gerundivally, and are a recognized formation as gerundives in the
classical language But adjectives m anīya without gerundive character
are also common.
c. Derivatives in īya with initial vṛddh i are sometimes made m
the later language e. g. pārvatīya , pāitāputrīya , āparapakṣīya ,
vāirakīya .
d. The pronominal possessives madīy a etc (516 a) do not occur either
in Veda or in Brāhmaṇa; but the ordinals dvitī́ya etc. (487 b, c: with
fractional tṛ́tīya and túrīya : 488 a) are found from the earliest period.
e. The possessives bhagavadīy a and bhavadīya , with the final of
the primitive made sonant, have probably had their form determined by the
pronominal possessives in -dīya.
465 STEM S I N iya, īya, eya, eyya, enya. [—1217
1216. ~T eya. With this suffix, accompanied by vṛddhiincrement of an initial syllable, are made adjectives, often
having a patronymic or metronymic value. Their neuter
is sometimes used as abstract noun. The accent rests
usually on the final in adjectives of descent, and on the
first syllable in others.
a. Examples are: ārṣeyá descendant of a söge (ṛ́si), jānaśruteyá
son of Jānaśrutì, sārameyá of Sarámā's race, śātavaneyá ŚatavanVs
descendant, rāthajiteyá son of Rathajū; ā́sneya of the blood (asán),
vā́steya of the bladder (vastí), pāúruṣeya coming from man (púruṣa),
pāitṛsvaseya of a paternal aunt (pitṛsvasṛ), etc
b. A more than usual proportion of derivatives in eya come from
primitives in i or ī; and probably the suffix first gained its form by addition
of ya to a gunated i , though afterward used independently.
c. The gerundive etc. derivatives in ya (above, 1213) from ā-roots
end in éya; and, besides such, RV. etc. have sabhéya from sabhā́, and
didṛkṣéya worth seeing, apparently from the desiderative noun didṛkṣā́,
after their analogy. M. has once adhyeya as gerund of √i.
d. Derivatives in the so-called suffix ineyà — as bhāgineyá,
jyāiṣṭhineya, kāniṣṭhineya — are doubtless made upon proximate
derivatives in -inī (fem.).
e. In eyya (i. e. eyia) end, besides the neuter abstract sahaśéyya
(above, 1213 c), the adjective of gerundival meaning stuṣéyya (with aor¬
istic s added to the root), and śapatheyyà curse-bringing (or accursed),
from śapátha.
1217. "ŚZfJ enya. This suffix is doubtless secondary in
origin, made by the addition of 7J ya to derivatives in a na¬
suffix; but, like others of similar origin, it is applied in some
measure independently, chiefly in the older language, where
it has nearly the value ofthe later anīya (above, 1215 b),
as making gerundival adjectives.
a. The y of this suffix is almost always to be read as vowel, and
the accent is (except in váreṇya) on the e: thus, -énia.
b. The gerundives have been all given above, under the different
conjugations to which they attach themselves (966b, 1019 b, 1038). The
RV. has also two non-gerundival adjectives, vīréṇya manly (vīrá), and
kīrténya famous (kīrti), and TS. has anabhiśastenyá (abhíśasti);
vijenyà (RV.) is a word of doubtful connections; śikṣeṇya instructive is
found in a Sūtra; prāvṛṣeṇya of the rainy season occurs later.
1218—] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 466
1218. MKU āyya. With this suffix are made gerundival adjectives, almost only inRV. They have been noticed above (966 c).
The ending is everywhere to be read as ā́yia.
a. A few adjectives without gerundival value, and neuter abstracts,
also occur: thus, bahupā́yya protecting many, nṛpā́yya men-guarding;
kuṇḍapā́yya, and purumā́yya, proper names; pūrvapā́yya first drink,
mahayā́yya enjoyment; — and rasā́yya nervous, and uttamā́yya summit,
contain no verbal root. Alā́yya is doubtful; also ākāyyà, which its accent refers to a different formation, along with prahāyyà (AV.: √hi)
messenger, and pravāyyà (AV.), of doubtful value.
1219. Mi6M āyana. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, patronymics made by this suffix are not rare. They come from
stems in ^ a‚ and have vṛddhi-strengthening of the first
syllable, and accent on the final.
a. In RV., the only example of this formation is kāṇvāyana (voc. :
káṇva); A V. has in metrical parts dāksāyaṇá and thefem.rāmāyaṇí;
and āmuṣyāyaṇá son of so-and-so (516) in its prose; ŚB. has rāja¬
stambā́yana beside -bāyaná. The RV. name ukṣaṇyā́yana is of a
different make, elsewhere unknown.
1220. ETTCft āyī. Only a very few words are made with this
suffix, namely agnā́yī (ogní) Agni's wife, vṛṣākapāyī wife of Vriṣā́¬
kapi; and later pūtakratāyī, and manāyī Hands wife (but manāvī́ŚB.).
a. They seem to be feminines of a derivative in a made with vṛddhiincrement of the final i of the primitive.
1221. ^ i. Derivatives made with this suffix are patronymics from nouns in a. The accent rests on the initial
syllable, which has the vṛddhi-strengthening.
a. In RV. are found half-a-dozen patronymics in i: for example, ā́g¬
niveśi, pāúrukutsi, prā́tardani, sā́ṁvaraṇi; AV. has but one, prā́¬
hrādi; in the Brāhmaṇas they are more common: thus, in AB., sāuyavasi,
jānaṁtapi, āruṇi, jānaki, etc. A single word of other value — sā́rathi
charioteer (sarátham) — is found from RV. down.
b. The words made with the so-called suffix aki — as vāiyāsaki
descendant of Vyāsa — are doubtless properly derivatives in i from others in
ka or oka. That the secondary suffix ika is probably made by addition
of ka to a derivative in i is pointed out below (1222j).
C RV. has tápuṣi, apparently from tápus with a secondary i added,
and the n. pr. śucantí; bhuvantí is found in B,, and jīvanti later.
1222. "Í ka. This is doubtless originally one of the
class of suffixes forming adjectives of appurtenance. And
467 STEMS IN āyya, āyana, ayī, i, ka. [—1222
that value it still has in actual use; yet only in a small
minority of occurrences. It has been, on the one hand,
specialized into an element forming diminutives; and, on
the other hand, and much more widely, attenuated into an
element without definable value, added to a great many
nouns and adjectives to make others of the same meaning
— this last is, even in the Veda, and still more in the
later language, its chief office.
a. Hence, ka easily associates itself with the finals of derivatives to which it is attached, and comes to seem along with them
an integral suffix, and is further used as such. Of this origin are
doubtless, as was seen above (1180, 1181), the so-called piimary suffixes uka and aka; and likewise the secondary suffix ika (below, j).
b. The accent of derivatives in ka varies — apparently without
rule, save that the words most plainly of diminutive character have
the tone usually on the suffix.
c Examples (from the older language) of words in which the suffix
has an adjective-making value are: ántaka (ánta) end-making, bálhika
(bálhi) of Balkh, āṇḍī́ka (āṇḍá) egg-bearing, sūcī́ka (sūcī́) stinging,
urvāruká fruit of the gourd (urvārú), paryāyiká (paryāyá) strophic;
from numerals, ekaká, dvaká, triká, áṣṭaka; tṛ́tīyaka of the third
day; from pronoun-stems, asmaka ours, yuṣmā́ka yours, mámaka mine
{516d); from prepositions, ántika near, ánuka following, ávakā a plant
(later adhika, utka); and, with accent retracted to the initial syllable
(besides áṣṭaka and tṛ́tīyaka, already given), rū́paka (rūpá) with form,
bábhruka (babhrú brown) a certain lizard. Bhāvatka your worship's
has an anomalous initial vṛddhi.
d. Of words in which a diminutive meaning is more or less probable:
aśvoká nag, konī́naka and kumāraká boy, kanīnakā́ or kanī́nikā
girl, pādaká little foot, putraká little son, rājaká princeling, śakun¬
taká birdling. Sometimes a contemptuous meaning is conveyed by such
a diminutive: for formations with this value from pronominal stems, see
above, 521; other examples are anyaká (RV.), álakam (RV.: from
álam), and even the verb-form yāmaki (for yāmi: KB.).
e. The derivatives in ka with unchanged meaning are made from
primitives of every variety of form, simple and compound, and have the
same variety of accent as the adjective derivatives (with which they are at
bottom identical). Thus:
f. From simple nouns and adjectives: ástaka home, nā́sikā nostril,
mákṣikā fly, avikā́ ewe, iṣukā́ arrow, dūraká distant, sarvaká all,
dhénukā (dhenú) cow, nágnaka (nagná) naked, báddhaka (baddhá)
captive, abhinnataraka by no means different, anastamitaké before sun-
1222—] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 468
set, vamraká ant, arbhaká small, śiśuká young, aṇīyaska finer,
ejatká trembling, abhimādyatká intoxicated, patayiṣṇuká flying. Such
derivatives in the later language are innumerable; from almost any given
noun or adjective may be made an equivalent, ending in ka or kā (according to the gender).
g. From compound primitives: svalpaká very small, vímanyuka
removing wrath, vikṣiṇatká destroying, pravartamānaká moving forward, viksīṇaká destroyed.
h. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, ka is often added to a possessive
adjective compound (1307), sometimes redundantly, but usually in order
to obtain a more manageable stem for inflection: thus, anakṣíka eyeless,
atvákka skinless, aretáska without seed, vyasthaka boneless, saśiraska
along with the head, ekagāyatrīka containing a single gāyatrī-verse,
gṛhītávasatīvarīka one who has taken yesterday's water, sapatnīka with
his spouse, bahuhastika having many elephants, sadīkṣopasátka with
dīkṣā and upasad, āhitasamitka with his fuel laid on, abhinavava¬
yaska of youthful age, aṅguṣṭhamātraka of thumb size.
i . The vowel by which the ka is preceded has often an irregular
character; and especially, a feminine in ikā is so common beside a masculine in aka as to be its regular correspondent (as is the case with the
so-called primary aka: above, 1181). In RV. are found beside one another only iyattaká and iyattika; but AV. has several examples.
j . Two suffixes made up of ka and a preceding vowel — namely,
aka and ika — are given by the grammarians as independent secondary
suffixes, requiring initial vṛddhi-strengthening of the primitive. Both of
them are doubtless originally made by addition of ka to a final i or a,
though coming to be used independently.
k. Of vṛddhi-derivatives in aka no examples have been noted from
the older language (unless māmaká mine is to be so regarded); and they
are not common in the later: thus, āvaśyaka necessary, vārddhaka
old age, rāmaṇīyaka delightfulness.
I. Of vṛddhi-derivatives in ika, the Veda furnishes a very few
cases: vā́santika vernal, vā́rṣika of the rainy season, hāímantika wintry
(none of them in RV.); AV. has kāirātikā́ of the Kirātas, apparent fem.
to a masc. kāirātaka, which is not found till later. Examples from a
more recent period (when they become abundant) are: vāidika relating to
the Vedas, dhārmika religious, āhnika daily, vāinayika well-behaved,
dāuvārika doorkeeper, nāiyāyika versed in the Nyāya.
m. Before the suffix ka, some finals show a form which is characteristic of external rather than internal combination. A final sonant mute,
of course, becomes surd, and an aspirate loses its aspiration (117 a, 114):
cf. -upasatka, -samitka, above, h. So also a palatal becomes guttural
(as before t etc.: 217): e. g. -srukka, -rukka, -tvakka, anṛkka.
A s remains after à, and becomes ṣ afteT an alterant vowel (180): e. g.
sadyaska, jyotiṣka, dīrghāyuṣka. But the other sibilants take the form
469 STEM S IN ka, aka, ika, ānī, īna, na, ima. [-—1224
they would have in composition: thus, adíkka (diś), ṣaṭka, –viṭka,
-tviṭka (ṣaṣ etc.). Anāśīrka (TS.: āśis) is anomalous; and so is pa¬
rutka (Āpast.), if it comes from parus.
1223. Several suffixes, partly of rare occurrence and questionable
character, contain a as consonantal element, and may be grouped
together here.
a. A few derivatives in āna in RV. were given above (1175 a).
b. With ānī (which is perhaps the corresponding feminine) are made
a small number of words, chiefly wife-names: thus, indrāṇī́, varuṇānī́
(these, with uśīnárāṇī, purukútsānī, mudgalā́nī, ūrjā́nī, are found
in RV,), rudrāṇī, mātulānī maternal uncle's wife, śarvāṇī, bhavānī,
īśānānī, śakrāṇī, upādhyāyānī, mṛḍānī, brahmāṇī; and yavānī.
c. The feminines in nī and knī from masculine stems in ta have
been already noticed above (1176d). From páti master, husband the
feminine is pàtnī, both as independent word, spouse, and as final of an
adjective compound: thus, devápatnī having a god for husband, sin¬
dhupatnī having the Indus as master. And the feminine of paruṣà rough
is in the older language sometimes párusṇī,
d. With īna are made a full series of adjective derivatives from the
words with final añc (407 ff.); they are accented usually upon the penult,
but sometimes on the final; and the same word has sometimes both accents : for example, apācī́na, nīcī́na, prācī́na, arvācī́na and arvā¬
cīná, pratīcína and pratīcīná, samīcīná. Besides these, a number of
other adjectives, earlier and later: examples are saṁvatsarīna yearly,
prāvṛṣī́ṇa of the rainy season, viśvajanī́na of all people, jñātakulī́na
of known family, adhvanīna traveller (ádhvan way), āśvīna day's
journey on horseback (áśva horse). RV. has once mā́kīna mine.
e. With ena is made sāmidhená (f. -nī́), from samídh, with initial
strengthening.
f. As to a few words in ina, compare 1209 c.
g. The adjectives made with simple na fall partly under another head
(below, 1245f); here may be noted śū́raṇa heroic (?), phálguna, śma¬
śruṇá, dadruṇa, and, with vṛddhi-strengthening, strāíṇa woman's (its
correlative, pāuṁsna, occurs late) and cyāutná inciting. If dróṇa comes
from dru wood, it has the anomaly of a guṇa-strengthening.
1224. Certain suffixes containing a m may be similarly
grouped.
a. With ima are made a small number of adjectives from nouns in
tra: thus, khanitrima made by digging, kṛtríma artificial, dattrima,
paktrima, pūtríma; in other finals, kuṭṭima, gaṇima, talima, tulima,
pākima, udgārima, vyāyogima, saṁvyūhima, nirvedhima, āsaṅ¬
gima, all late. In agrima (RV.) foremost the ma has perhaps the ordinal value.
b. The uses of simple ma in forming superlatives (474) and ordinals
(487 d, e) have been already noticed, and the words thus made specified.
1224—] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 470
c. A few neuter abstracts end in mna : thus, dyumn á brightness,
nṛmṇ á manliness; and, from particles, nimn á depth and sumn á welfare.
The suffix comes perhaps from man with an added a.
d. For the words showing a final min, see below, 1231.
1225. -TOT maya. With this suffix are formed adjectives
signifying made or composed or consisting of, also abounding in, that which is denoted by the primitive.
a. The accent is always on the m á , and the feminine is regularly
and usually in máyī. In the oldest language (V.), final as remains unchanged before the suffix: thus, manasmáya , nabhasmáya , ayasmáya ;
but d is treated as in external combination: thus, mṛnmáya ; and in the
Brāhmaṇas and later, finals in general have the latter treatment: e. g. te¬
jomáya, adomáya, āpomáya, jyotirmaya, yajurmáya, etanmáya,
asṛṅmaya, vaṅmáya , ammaya, pravṛṇmaya. RV. has aśmanmáy a
(later aśmamaya). In hiramnáy a (B. and later) the primitive (hira–
ṇya) is peculiarly mutilated. RV. has sūmáya of good make, and kim¬
máya made of what ?
b. A very few examples of a feminine in y ā occur in the later
language.
1226. ‡ ra. A few derivative adjectives are made with
this suffix. Accent and treatment of the primitive are various.
a. With simple addition of ra are made, for example: pāṃsur á
dusty, -śrīr a (also -ślīla) in aśrīr á ugly, dhūmr á dusky (dhūmá smoke),
madhura (late) sweet. In an example or two, there appears to be accompanying initial strengthening: thus, ā́gnīdhra of the fire-kindler (agnídh),
śāṅkur á stake-like (śaṅkú); and in śekhar a (also śikhara), a guṇastrengthening.
b. With an inorganic vowel before the ending are made, for example,
médhir a wise, rathir á in a chariot; karmā́ra smith; dantura (late)
tusked; acchér a pMS.), śrāmaṇera , saṁgamanera.
C The use of r a in forming a few words of comparative meaning was
noticed above (474), and the words so made were given.
1227. la. This and the preceding suffix are really
but two forms of the same. In some words they exchange
with one another, and ^ la is usually, but not always, the
later form in use.
a. Examples are: bahula abundant, madhul á (later madhura) and
madhūl a sweet, bhīmal a fearful, jīval á liuely, aślīl á (and aśrīrá )
wretched; with ā, vācāl a talkatioe (late); with i , phenila foamy (late:
471 STEM S I N mna, maya, ra, la, va, śa, in. [-—1230
phéna); with u, vātula and vātūla windy (late: vā́ta); and mātula
maternal uncle is a somewhat irregular formation from mātṛ́ mother.
b. In the later language are found a few adjectives in lu, always
preceded by ā; examples are: kṛpālu and dayālu compassionate, īrṣ¬
yālu jealous, uṣṇālu heated, śayālu and svapnālu sleepy, lajjālu modest, lālālu drooling, śraddhālu trusting, krodhālu passionate. One or
two such derivatives having a primary aspect were noticed at 1192 b.
1228. cf v a . A small number of adjectives have this
ending (accented, added to an unaltered primitive).
a. Examples are: arṇavá billowy, keśavà hairy; rāsnāvá girded;
añjivá slippery, śantivá tranquillizing, śraddhivá credible, amaṇiva
jewelless, rājīva striped.
b. There are a very few adjectives in vala and vaya which may be
noticed here: thus, kṛṣīvalá peasant (kṛṣi ploughing), ūrṇāvalá wooly,
rajasvala‚urjasvala, payasvala, śādvala, naḍvala, śikhāvala, dan¬
tāvala; druváya wooden dish, caturvaya fourfold.
c With vya are made two or three words from names of relationship: thus, pítṛvya paternal uncle, bhrā́tṛvya nephew, enemy.
1229. ST ś a . A very few adjectives appear to be made
by an added ending of this form.
a. Thus, romaśá or lomaśá hairy, étaśa (also etaśá) variegated,
arvaśá or árvaśa hasting, babhluśá or babhruśá and kapiśa brownish,
kṛṣṇaśa blackish, yuvaśá youthful, bāliśa childish, karkaśa harsh, kar¬
maśa (?) n. pr.; and giriśa, vāriśa (?), vṛkṣaśa are doubtless of the
same character (not containing the root śī). The character of harīmaśá,
káśmaśa, kaláśa is doubtful.
b. Many of the adjective derivatives already treated have sometimes a possessive value, the general meaning of being concerned with,
having relation to being specialized into that of being in possession of.
But there are also a few distinctively possessive suffixes; and some
of these, on account of the unlimited freedom of using them and
the frequency of their occurrence, are very conspicuous parts of the
general system of derivation. These will be next considered.
1230. Ś^in. Possessive adjectives of this ending may
be formed almost unlimitedly from stems in ET a or 5fT ā‚
and are sometimes (but very rarely) made from stems with
other finals.
a. A final vowel disappears before the suffix. The accent is on
the suffix. As to the inflection of these adjectives, see above, 438 ff.
They are to be counted by hundreds in the older language, and are
equally or more numerous in the later.
1230--] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 472
b. Examples from a-stems are: aśvín possessing horses, dhanin
wealthy, pakṣín winged, balin strong, bhagin fortunate, vajrin wielding the thunderbolt, śikhaṇḍín crested, hastin possessing hands, ṣoḍaśín
of sixteen, gardabhanādín having an ass's voice, brahmavarcasin of
eminent sanctity, sādhudevín having luck at play, kūcidarthín having
errands everywhither*; — from ā-stems, monīṣín wise, śikhín crested, ṛtā¬
yín pious.
C. Derivatives from other stems are very few in comparison: thus,
from i-stems, atithin (?)‚ abhimātín, arcín, aśanin, ūrmin, kāla¬
nemin, khādín, -pāṇin, marīcin, mauñjin, māulin, -yonin, venin,
saṁdhin, samṛddhin, surabhin (of those found only at the end of a
possessive compound the character is doubtful, since case-forms of i- and
in-stems are not seldom exchanged); — from u-stems, gurvin, śatagvín
(?), veṇavin (with guṇa of the u); — from stems in an, varmin,
karmin, carmin, -chadmin, janmin, dhanvin, -dharmin, nāmin,
brahmin, yakṣmin, śarmin, and śvanín; — in as, retin rich in seed,
and probably varcin n. pr.; also (perhaps through stems in -sa) śavasín
and sahasin, manasin, -vayasin; —isolated are parisrajin garlanded.
and hiranín (hiránya).
d. It was pointed out above (1183) that derivatives in in have assumed on a large scale the aspect and value of primary derivatives, with the
significance of present participles, especially at the end of compounds. The
properly secondary character of the whole formation is shown, on the one
hand, by the frequent use in the same manner of words bearing an unmistakably secondary form, as praśnín, garbhín, jūrṇín, dhūmín, snā¬
nin, homin, matsarín, paripanthín, pravepanín, saṁgatin; and,
on the other hand, by the occurrence of reverted palatals (218) before the
in, which could only be as in replaced a: thus, arkín, -bhaṅgín, -sangin, -rokín.
e. In a few cases, there appears before the in a y preceded by an
ā of inorganic character: thus, dhanvāyín, tantrāyin, śvetāyin,
sṛkāyín, ātatāyín, pratihitāyín, marāyín, ṛtāyin, svadhāyín (VS.
TB. -vín). The y in all such words is evidently the inserted y after ā
(258 a), and to assume for them a suffix yin is quite needless.
f. The accentuation pravrā́jin, prasyándin, in the concluding part
of ŚB., is doubtless false; and the same is to be suspected for śā́kī, sárī,
írī (RV., each once).
g. A very few words in in have not suffered the possessive specialization. Such are vanin tree, hermit, kapotin dovelike, aṇḍin scrotum¬
ike (cf. 1233f),
1231. fÊR^min. With this suffix are made an extremely
small number of possessive adjectives.
a. In the old language, the words in min have the aspect of derivatives in in from nouns in ma, although in two or three cases — iṣmín
473 STEM S I N in, min, vin, vant. [-1233
and ṛgmín in RV., vāgmín in ŚB.— no such nouns are found in actual
use beside them. In the later language, min is used as independent element in a very few words: thus, gomin possessing cattle, svāmin (Sūtras
and later) master, lord (sva own), kakudmin humped.
b. The two words ṛgmín and vāgmín show not only reversion but
also sonantizing of an original palatal.
1232. fä^vin. The adjectives made with this suffix
are also not numerous. They have the same meanings with
those in ?pTJ-n. The accent is on the suffix.
a. The RV. has ten adjectives in vin; they become rather more common later. Though for them may be suspected a similar origin to those in
yin andmin (above), signs of it are much less clearly traceable.
b. The great majority have vin added after as: e. g. namasvin
reverential, tapasvin heated, tejasvin brilliant, yaśasvín beautiful, and
so retasvín, enasvín, harasvin, etc.; and śatasvín, śrotrasvín, rū¬
pasvin have an inserted s, by analogy with them. Most others have ā
(sometimes, by lengthening): thus, glāvín, medhāvín, māyāvín, sa¬
bhāvín, aṣṭravín obedient to the goad, dvayavin double-minded, ubha¬
yāvín possessing of both kinds, dhanvāvin, tandravin, āmayāvín,
ātatāvín. More rarely, vin is added after another consonant than s: thus,
vāgvín, dhṛṣadvín, ātmanvín, kumudvin, sragvin, yajvin, ajvin.
The doubtful word vyaśnuvín (VS., once : TB. vyáśniya) appears to add
the ending (or in, with euphonic v) to a present tense-stem.
c. An external form of combination is seen only in vāgvín and
dhṛṣadvín (both Vedic), with the common reversion of a palatal in sragvin.
1233. ~rT vant. Very numerous possessive adjectives
are made by this suffix, from noun-stems of every form,
both in the earlier language and in the later.
a. The accent generally remains upon the primitive, without
change; but an accent resting on a stem-final, if this be anything but
á or ā́‚isin the majority of cases thrown forward upon the suffix.
As to inflection, formation offeminine, etc., see 452 ff.
b. A final vowel — oftenest a, very rarely u —is in many words
lengthened in the older language (247) before this ending, as in composition. Nouns in an more often retain the n.
c. Examples of the normal formation are: with unchanged accent,
kéśavant hairy, putrávant having a son, prajánanavant procreative,
puṇḍárīkavant rich in lotuses, híraṇyavant rich in gold, apūpávant
having cakes, rājanyàvant allied with a kshatriya; prajā́vant having progeny, ū́rṇāvant wooly, dákṣiṇāvant rich in sacrificial gifts; sàkhivant
having friends, saptarṣívant accompanied by the seven sages; śácīvant
powerful, táviṣīvant vehement, pátnīvant with spouse, dhīvant devoted,
1233—] XVII. SECONDARY DERIVATION. 474
dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant (94b) with heaven and earth; víṣṇuvant accompanied
by Vishnu; háritvant golden, āvṛ́tvant hither turned, āśī́rvant mixed
with milk, svarvant splendid, śarádvant full of years, púṁsvantftavinga
male, páyasvant rich, támasvant dark, bráhmaṇvant accompanied with
worship, rómaṇvant hairy (but also romavant, lómavant, vṛtraha¬
vant, etc.), kakúbhvant containing a kakúbh; — with accent on the
suffix, agnivánt havingfire,rayivánt wealthy, nṛvánt manly, padvánt
having feet, nasvánt with nose, āsanvánt having a mouth, śīrṣaṇvánt
headed (also śīrṣavant).
d. With final stem-vowel lengthened: for example, áśvāvant (beside
áśvavant) possessing horses, sutā́vant having soma expressed, vṛ́ṣṇyāvant
of virile force (about thirty such cases occur in V.); śáktīvant mighty,
svádhitīvant having axes, ghṛ́ṇīvant hot; viṣūvánt dividing (víṣu apart),
e. Certain special irregularities are as follows: an inserted s in ín¬
drasvant, máhiṣvant; inserted n in vánanvant, búdhanvant, vá¬
dhanvant, gartanvánt, maṃsanvánt; shortening of a final of the primitive in māyávant, yājyàvant, puronuvākyàvant, āmíkṣavant,
sarasvativant; abbreviation in hiraṇvant; inserted ā in śavasāvant,
sahasāvant, and the odd mahimāvant; anomalous accent in kṛśanā́¬
vant (if from kṛ́śana peart); derivation from particles in antárvant
pregnant, viṣūvánt (above, d).
f. Instead of the specialized meaning of possessing•, the more general
one of like to,resembling is seen in a number of words, especially in the
derivatives from pronominal stems, mavant like me etc. (517: add
ī́vant, kī́vant). Other examples are indrasvant like 1ndra, nīḍávant
nestlike, nī́lavant blackish, nṛvánt manly, pṛ́ṣadvant speckled, kṣāí¬
tavant princely; compare the later paravant dependent. It was pointed
out above (1107) that the adverb of comparison in vát is the accusative
neuter of a derivative of this class.
g. In a few words, vant has the aspect of forming primary derivatives: thus, vivásvant (or vivasvant) shining, also n. pr., ánupa¬
dasvant, árvant, pípiṣvant (?), yahvánt.
h. For the derivatives in vat from prepositions, which appear to have
nothing to do with this suffix, see 1245j.
i . While this suffix is generally added to a primitive according to the
rules of internal combination (see examples above, c), treatment also as
in external combination begins already in RV., in pṛ́ṣadvant (pṛ́ṣat),
and becomes more common later: thus, tapovant, tejovant, aṅgirovant
(beside tápasvant etc.); vidyúdvant (beside vidyutvant), bṛhadvant,
jagadvant, sadvant, etc.; triṣṭubvant (against kakubhvant), sam¬
idvant, vimṛdvant; vagvant (against ṛkvant); svarāḍvont; havya¬
vāḍvant; āśīrvant.
j . None of the suffixes beginning with v show in the Veda resolution
of v to u.
475 STEM S I N vant, van, mant. [—1235
1234. 5Rvan. The secondary derivatives in this suffix belong
to the older language, and are a small number, of which extremely
few have more than an occurrence or two.
a. They have the aspect of being produced under the joint influence
of primary van and secondary vant. A final short vowel is usually lengthened before the suffix. The accent is various, but oftenest on the penult
of the stem. The feminine (like that of the derivatives in primary van:
1169 f) is in varL
b. The Vedic examples are: from a-stems, ṛṇāván or ṛṇaván, ṛtā́¬
van (and f. -varī), ṛ́ghāvan, dhitā́van, satyā́van, sumnāvárī, and
moghávan; from ā-stems, sūnṛ́tāvarī, svadhā́van (and f. -varī); from
i-stems, amatīván, arātīván, śruṣṭīván, muṣīván, and kṛṣīvan (only
in the further derivative kā́rṣīvaṇa); dhīvan; from consonant-stems,
átharvan, samádvan, sáhovan (bad AV. variant to RV. sahā́van);
hā́rdvan (TA. also hārdivan). Somewhat anomalous are sahā́van,
índhanvan (for índhanavan?), and sanítvan (for sánitivan?). The
only words of more than sporadic occurrence are ṛtā́van, maghávan,
átharvan.
0. Sáhovan (see b) is the only example of external combination
with this suffix.
1235. ī-frT^mant. This is a twin-suffix to ~~ vant (above,
1233); their derivatives have the same value, and are to
some extent exchangeable with one another. But possessives in J-M mant are much less frequent (in the older language, about a third as many), and are only very rarely
made from a-stems.
a. If the accent of the primitive word is on the final, it is in
the great majority of instances (three quarters) thrown forward upon
the added suffix; otherwise, it maintains its place unchanged. A final
vowel before the suffix is in only a few cases made long. Examples are:
b. With the accent of the primitive unchanged: káṇvamant, yáva¬
mant rich in barley, and vibhavamant n. pr. (these alone from a-stems,
and the first only occurring once); ávimant possessing sheep, aśánimant
bearing the thunderbolt, óṣadhīmant rich in herbs, vā́śīmant carrying an
axe, vásumant possessing good things, mádhumant rich in sweets, tváṣ¬
ṭṛmant accompanied by Tvashtar, hótṛmant provided with priests, ā́yuṣ¬
mant long-lived, jyótiṣmant full of brightness; — ulkuṣī́mant accompanied with meteors, pīlúmant (P), prasū́mant having young shoots, gómant
rich in kine, garútmant winged, vihútmant with libation, kakúdmant
humped, vidyúnmant (with irregular assimilation of t: VS. has also ka¬
kúnmant) gleaming, virukmant shining, havíṣmant with libations,
vipruṣmant with drops.
1235—] XVII . SECONDAR Y DERIVATION . 476
c. With the accent thrown forward upon the ending: asimánt with
knives, agnimánt having -fire, iṣudhimánt with a quiver, paśumánt possessing cattle, vāyumánt with wind, pitṛmánt (AV. pitṛ́mant) accompanied by the Fathers, mātṛmánt having a mother; no long final vowels
are found before the suffix in this division, and only once a consonant, in
dasmát (RV., once).
d. Protraction of a final vowel is seen in tvíṣīmant, dhrájīmant,
hírīmant; in jyótiṣīmont is irregularly inserted an ī (after the analogy
of táviṣīmant); in śuciṣmant, mahiṣmant, an s; suṣumánt (RV.,
once) appears to be primary.
e. The adverb āśumát appears to be related to adverbs in vát as
the suffix mant to vant.
f. By the side of derivatives made with internal combination appears
vidyúnmant even in RV.; [and other like cases occur later: thus, pari¬
srúnmant, kakunmant, kṣunmant, purorúṅmant, vāṅmant, kakum¬
mant, gudaliṃmant, yaśomant.
1236. It has been seen above (especially in connection with the
suffixes a and ya) that the neuter of a derivative adjective is frequently used as an abstract noun. There are, however, two suffixes
which have in the later language the specific office of making abstract
nouns from adjectives and nouns; and these are found also, more
sparingly used, in the oldest language, each having there one or two
other evidently related suffixes beside it.
a. For derivatives of the same value made with the suffix iman, see
above, 1168i—k.
1237. rTT tā. With this suffix are made feminine abstract nouns, denoting the quality of being so and so, from
both adjectives and nouns.
a. The form of the primitive is unchanged, and the accent is
uniformly on the syllable preceding the suffix.
b. Examples (from the older language) are: devátā divinity, vīrátā
manliness, puruṣátā human nature, agnítā firehood, apaśútā cattle-less¬
ness, bandhútā relationship, vasútā wealth; nagnàtā nakedness, suvī¬
rátā wealth in retainers, anapatyátā lack of descendants, agótā poverty
in cattle, abrahmátā lack of devotion, aprajástā absence of progeny; also
doubtless sūnṛ́tā (from sūnára), although the word is a few times used
as an adjective (like śaṁtāti and satyatāti: see next paragraph).
o. Of special formation are mamátā selfishness, trétā triplicity, astitā
actuality. RV. has avī́ratā, with exceptional accent. In ekapatnitā is
seen a shortened final vowel of the primitive. Janátā has acquired a concrete meaning, people, folk; also grāmatā (once) villages collectively.
1238. rTTÍH tāti, rfícT tat. These suffixes are Vedic only, and
the latter is limited to RV. Their relationship to the preceding is
477 STEM S I N mant, tā, tāti, tat, tva, tvana. [—1240
evident, but opinions are at variance as to its nature. The accentis
as in the derivatives with tā.
a. The quotable examples in tāti are* ariṣṭátāti uninjuredness,
ayakṣmátāti freedom from disease, gṛbhītátāti the being seized, jyeṣ¬
ṭhátāti supremacy, devátāti divinity, vasútāti wealth, śáṁtāti goodfortune, sarvátāti completeness, and, with exceptional accent, ástatāti
home, and dákṣatāti cleverness; śivatāti and śubhatāti occur (once
each) in the later language. Two words in tāti are used adjectively (inorganically, by apposition9
) śáṁtāti (RV., twice, and A V. xix, 44. 1,
in manuscripts), and satyatāti (RV., once: voc).
b. The words in tat (appaiently made by abbreviation from tāti)
occur in only one or two cases-forms ; they were all mentioned above (383 k. 2),
1239.
—
tva. With this suffix are made neuter nouns,
of the same value as the feminines in cTT t ā (above, 1237).
a. The neuter abstracts in tva are in the older language considerably more common than the feminines in tā‚ although themselves also not very numerous The accent is without exception on
the suffix.
b. Examples (from the older language) are . amṛtatvá immortality,
devatvá divinity, subhagatvá good-fortune, ahamuttaratvá struggle for
precedency, śucitvá purity, patitvá husbandship, taraṇitvá energy, dīr¬
ghāyutvá long life, śatrutvá enmity, bhrātṛtvá brotherhood, vṛṣatvá
virility, sātmatvá soulfulness, maghavattvá liberality, rakṣastvá sorcery.
In anāgāstvá and -prajāstvá there is a lengthening of the final syllable of the primitive, and in sāuprajāstvá (AV., once) this appears to
be accompanied by initial vṛddhi (sāubhagatvá is doubtless from sāú¬
bhaga, not subhága); and in these and pratyanastvá there is an apparent insertion of s. In sadhanitvá (RV ), vasatīvaritvá (TS.), rohi¬
ṇitvá (TB.), there is shortening of final feminine ī before the suffix. Of
peculiar formation are astitva actuality and sahatva union. The apparent
feminine datives yūthatvāyāi and gaṇatvāyāi (KS ) are doubtless false
forms.
o. Besides the usual guttural reversions in samyaktva, sayuktva,
we have external combination in samittva (-idh-) and pūrvavāṭtva
(-vah-),
d. In iṣitatvátā (RV., once) incitedness, and puruṣatvátā (RV.,
twice) human quality, appears to be a combination of the two equivalent
suffixes tva and tā.
e. The v of tva is to be read in Veda as u only once (rakṣastuá).
1240. ^FT tvana. The derivatives made with this suffix are,
like those in tva, neuter abstracts. They occur almost only in RV.,
and, except in a single instance (martyatvaná^, have beside them
equivalent derivatives in tva. The accent is on the final, and the
tva is never resolved into tua.
1240—] XVII . SECONDAR Y DERIVATION . 478
a. The words are: kavitvaná, janitvaná, patitvaná (also JB.),
martyatvaná, mahitvaná, vasutvaná, vṛṣatvaná, sakhitvaná.
1241. A few suffixes make no change in the character as part
of speech of the primitive to which they are added, but either are
merely formal appendages, leaving the value of the word what it was
before, or make a change of degree, or introduce some other modification of meaning.
1242. The suffixes of comparison and ordinal suffixes
have for the most part been treated already, and need only
a reference here.
a. cTJ[ tara and cFT tama are the usual secondary suffixes of
adjective comparison: respecting their use as such, see above, 471
—473; respecting the use oftama as ordinal etc suffix, see 487—8;
respecting that of their accusatives as adverbial suffixes to prepositions etc, see 1111 e.
b. In vṛtratára and purutáma (RV.) the accent is anomalous;
in mṛḍayáttama, it is drawn forward to the final of the participle, as
often in composition (1309); śaśvattamá (RV.) has the ordinal accent;
saṁvatsaratamá (ŚB.) is an ordinal; dívātara (RV., once: an error?)
is an ordinary adjective, of the day; surabhíṣṭama and tuvíṣṭama insert
a s; kārotará and kāulitará are probably vṛddhi-derivatives in a. In
vatsatará (f. -rī́) weanling, aśvatará mule, and dhenuṣṭarī́ cow losing
her milk, the application of the suffix is peculiar and obscure; so also in
rathaṁtará, name of a certain sāman.
c. ra and ^ ma, like tara and tama, have a comparative and
superlative value; and the latter of them forms ordinals: see above,
474, 487.
d. ST tha, like tama and ma, forms ordinals from a few numerals: see 487c; also (withfem.in -thī́j from tati, kati, yati, iti:
thus, tatithá so~many-eth etc
e. Apparently by false analogy with tatithá etc. (above, d), the
quasi-ordinals tāvatitha, yāvatitha, bahutitha are made, *as if with a
suffix titha (also katititha, late, for katithá); and, it is said, from other
words meaning a number or collection, as'gaṇa, pūga, saṁgha; but none
such are quotable.
1243. Of diminutive suffixes there are none in Sanskrit with
clearly developed meaning and use. The occasional employment of
ka, in a somewhat indistinct way, to make diminutives, has been
noticed above (1222).
1244. Of the ordinary adjective-making suffixes, given above,
some occasionally make adjectives from adjectives, with slight or
imperceptible modification of value. The only one used to any considerable extent in this way is ka: as to which, see 1222.
479 STRM S I N tara, tama, tha, taya, tá, na, tana ETC. [—1245
1245. A few suffixes are used to make derivatives from certain
limited and special classes of words, as numerals and particles. Thus:
a. cPT
tay a makes a few adjectives, meaning of so many divisions or kinds (used in the neuter as collectives), from numerals:
thus, ékataya (MS.), dvitaya, tritaya, cátuṣṭaya (AV.), ṣaṭtaya (KB.:
with external combination), saptátaya (ŚB.), aṣṭātaya (AB.), dáśataya
(RV.), bahútaya (TS.). Their fem. is in -yī.
b. rU tya makes a class of adjectives from particles: e. g. nitya
own, níṣṭya foreign, amā́tya companion, etc. As the examples show,
the accent of the primitive is retained. The fem. is in -tyā.
c. The other quotable examples are ápatya, āvíṣṭya, sánutya,
antastya, anyatastya-, tatastya, kutastya, atratya, tatratya, ya¬
tratya, kutratya, ihatya, upatya, adhitya, prātastya, dakṣiṇātya
(instead of which, the regular form, is generally found dākṣmātya, apparently a further vṛddhi-derivative from it: as if belonging to the southerners'), and pāścāttya and pāurastya (of a similar character: these three
last are said by the grammarians to be accented on the final, as is proper
for vṛddhi-derivatives); aptyá and āptyá perhaps contain the same suffix.
In antastya and prātastya is seen external combination.
d. The y of tya is in RV. always to be read as i after a heavy
syllable.
e. ft ta forms ekatá, dvitá, and tritá, also muhūrtá moment,
and apparently avatá well (for water).
f. With ^ na are made purāṇá ancient, víṣuṇa various, and
perhaps samāná like.
g. With rPT tana or (in a few cases) ~ tna are made adjectives
from adverbs, nearly always of time: e, g. pratná ancient, nū́tana
or nū́tna present, sanātána or sanátna lasting, divātana of the day,
śvástana of tomorrov, hyastana of yesterday. The accent is various.
The feminine is in nī́.
h. The other quotable examples are: agretana, adyatana, adhu¬
nātána, idaṁtana, idānīṁtana, etarhitana, ciraṁtana, tadānīṁ¬
tana, doṣātana, puratana, prāktana, prātastána, sadātana, sā¬
yaṁtána; from adverbs of place, adhastana, arvāktana, uparitana,
kutastana; — with tna, parastāttna, purastāttna. A further vṛddhi¬
derivative, with equivalent meaning, nāutana (cf. above, c), occurs late.
In PB. is once found tvattana belonging to thee.
i . Besides the obvious cases of an assimilated final m before this
suffix, we have external combination in prātastána.
j . Sfff vat makes from particles of direction the feminine nouns
mentioned above (383 k. 1).
k. kaṭa, properly a noun in composition, is reckoned by the
1245--] XVIII. COMPOSITION. 480
grammarians as a suffix, in utkaṭa, nikaṭa, prakaṭa, vikaṭa (RV.,
once, voc), and saṁkaṭa (all said to be accented on the final).
I. A suffix vana is perhaps to be seen i n nivaná, pravaṇa; —
a n d āla i n antarāla.
m. Occasional derivatives made with the ordinary suffixes of
primary and secondary derivation from numerals and particles have
been noted above: thus, see ana (1150n), ti (1157h), ant (1172a),
u (1178i), a (1209i), ka (1222c), mna (1224c), maya (1225a), vant
(1233 e).
CHAPTE R XVIII .
FORMATION OF COMPOUND STEMS.
1246. T H E frequent combination of declinable stems
with one another to form compounds which then are treated
as if simple, in respect to accent, inflection, and construction, is a conspicuous feature of the language, from its
earliest period.
a. There is, however, a marked difference between the earlier
and the later language as regards the length and intricacy of the
combinations allowed. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, it is quite rare that
more than two stems are compounded together — except that to some
much used and familiar compound, as to an integral word, a further
element is sometimes added. But the later the period, and, especially,
the more elaborate the style, the more a cumbrous and difficult aggregate of elements, abnegating the advantages of an inflective language,
takes the place of the due syntactical union of formed words into
sentences.
1247. Sanskrit compounds fall into three principal
classes :
I. a. Copulativ e or aggregative compounds, of which
the members are syntactically coordinate: a joining together
into one of words which in an uncompounded condition
would be connected by the conjunction and (rarely or).
481 CLASSE S OF COMPOUNDS. [—1247
b. Examples are: índrāváruṇāu 1ndra and Faruna, satyōnṛté
truth and falsehood, kṛtākṛtám done and undone, devagandharvamā¬
nuṣoragarakṣasās gods and Qandharvas and men and serpents and demons.
c. The members of such a compound may obviously be of any number, two or more than two. No compound of any other class can contain
more than two members — of which, however, either or both may be compound, or decompound (below, 1248).
II. d. Determinative compounds, of which the
former member is syntactically dependent on the latter, as
its determining or qualifying adjunct: being either, 1. a
noun (or pronoun) limiting it in a case-relation, or, 2. an
adjective or adverb describing it. And, according as it is
the one or the other, are to be distinguished the two subclasses: A. Dependent compounds; and B. Descriptive
compounds. Their difference is not an absolute one.
e. Examples are: of dependent compounds, amitrasena army of
enemies, pādodaka water for the feet, āyurdā́ life-giving, hástakṛta
made with the hands; of descriptive compounds, maharṣí great sage, priya¬
sakhi dear friend, amitra enemy, súkṛta well done.
f. These two classes are of primary value; they have undergone
no unifying modification in the process of composition; their character as parts of speech is determined by their final member, and they
are capable of being resolved into equivalent phrases by giving the
proper independent form and formal means of connection to each
member. That is not the case with the remaining class, which accordingly is more fundamentally distinct from them than they are from
one another.
III, g. Secondary adjective compounds, the value
of which is not given by a simple resolution into their
component parts, but which, though having as final member
a noun, are themselves adjectives. These, again, are of two
sub-classes: A. Possessive compounds, which are nouncompounds of the preceding class, with the idea of possessing added, turning them from nouns into adjectives;
B. Compounds in which the second member is a noun syntactically dependent on the first: namely, 1. Prepositional
compounds, of a governing preposition and following noun;
1247—] XVIII. COMPOSITION. 482
2. Participia l compounds (only Vedic), of a present participle and its following object.
h. The sub-class B. is comparatively small, and its second division
(participial compounds) is hardly met with even in the later Vedic.
i. Examples are: vīrasena possessing a hero-army, prajākāma
having desire of progeny, tigmáśṛṅga sharphorned, háritasraj wearing
green garlands; atimātrá excessive; yāvayáddveṣas driving away
enemies.
j . The adjective compounds are, like simple adjectives, liable to be
used, especially in the neuter, as abstract and collective nouns, and in the
accusative as adverbs; and out of these uses have grown apparent special
classes of compounds, reckoned and named as such by the Hindu grammarians. The relation of the classification given above to that presented in
the native grammar, and widely adopted from the latter by the European
grammars, will be made clear as we go on to treat the classes in detail.
1248. A compound may, like a simple word, become a
member in another compound, and this in yet another —
and so on, without definite limit. The analysis of any
compound, of whatever length (unless it be a copulative),
must be made by a succession of bisections.
a. Thus, the dependent compound pūrvajanmakṛta done in a previous existence is first divisible into kṛta and the descriptive pūrvajanman,
then this into its elements; the dependent sakalanītiśāstratattvajña
knowing the essence of all books of behavior has first the root-stem jña (for
√jñā) knowing separated from the rest, which is again dependent; then
this is divided into tattva essence and the remainder, which is descriptive;
this, again, divides into sakala all and nītiśāstra books of behavior, of
which the latter is a dependent compound and the former a possessive (sa
and kalā having its parts together).
1249. a. The final of a stem is combined with the initial
of another stem in composition according to the general
rules for external combination: they have been given, with
their exceptions, in chap. III., above.
b. If a stem has a distinction of strong and weak forms,
it regularly enters into composition as prior member in its
weak form; or, if it has a triple distinction (311), in its
middle form.
483 FOR M OF PRIO R MEMBE R OF COMPOUND . [—1250
o. That is, especially, stems in ṛ or ar‚ at or ant, ac or añc, etc.,
show in composition the forms in ṛ, at, ac, etc.; while those in an
and in usually (exceptions sometimes occur, as vṛṣaṇaśvá, vṛṣaṇ¬
vasú) lose their final n, and are combined as if a and i were their
proper finals.
d. As in secondary derivation (1203 d), so also as prior member of
a compound, a stem sometimes shortens its final long vowel (usually ī‚ rarely ā): thus, in V., rodasiprā́, pṛthiviṣṭhā́, pṛthiviṣád, dhā́rapūta,
dhāravāká; in B., pṛthivi-dā, -bhāga, -loká, sarasvatikṛta, senā¬
nigrāmaṇyāù; in S., garbhiniprāyaścitta, sāmidheniprāiṣa, vas¬
atīvaripariharaṇa, ekādaśiniliṅga, prapharvidā, devatalakṣaṇa,
devatapradhānatva; later, devakinandana, lakṣmivardhana, ku¬
māridatta, muhūrtaja, iṣṭakacita, etc.
e. Occasionally, a stem is used as prior member of a compound which
does not appear, or not in that form, as an independent word: examples
are mahā great (apparently used independently in V. in accusative), tuvi
mighty (V.), dvi two.
f. Not infrequently, the final member of a compound assumes a special form: see below, 1315.
1250. But a case-form in the prior member of a compound is by
no means rare, from the earliest period of the language. Thus:
a. Quite often, an accusative, especially before a root-stem, or a derivative in a of equivalent meaning: for example, pataṁgá going by flight,
dhanaṁjayá winning wealth, abhayaṁkará causing absence of danger,
puṣṭimbhará bringing prosperity, vācamīṅkhayá inciting the voice; but
also sometimes before words of other form, as áśvamiṣṭi horse-desiring,
śubhaṁyā́van going in splendor, subhāgaṁkáraṇa making happy,
bhayaṁkartṛ causer of fear. In a few cases, by analogy with these, a
word receives an accusative form to which it has no right: thus, hṛdaṁsáni,
makṣúṁgama, vasuṁdhara, ātmambhari.
b. Much more rarely, an instrumental: for example, girāvṛ́dh increasing by praise, vācā́stena stealing by incantation, krátvāmagha gladly
bestowing, bhāsā́ketu bright with light, vidmanapas active with wisdom.
c. In a very few instances, a dative: thus, nareṣṭhā́ serving a man,
asméhiti errand to us, and perhaps kiyedhā́ and mahevṛ́dh.
d. Not seldom, a locative; and this also especially with a root-stem
or a-derivative: for example, agregá going at the head, divikṣít dwelling
in the sky, vaneṣáh prevailing in the wood, aṅgeṣṭhā́ existing in the limbs,
proṣṭheśayá lying on a couch, sutékara active with the soma, diví¬
cara moving in the sky; āréśatru having enemies far removed, sumná¬
āpi near in favor, máderaghu hasting in excitement, yudhiṣṭhira firm
in battle, antevāsin dwelling near; apsujá born in the waters, hṛtsvás
hurling at hearts.
e. Least often, a genitive: thus, rāyáskāma desirous of wealth,
1250—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 484
akasyavíd knowing no one. But the older language has a few examples
of the putting together of a genitive with its governing noun, each member of the combination keeping its own accent: see below, 1267d.
f. Ablative forms are to be seen in balātkāra violence and balāt¬
kṛta, and perhaps in parātpriya. And a stem in ṛ sometimes appears in a
copulative compound in its nominative form: thus, pitāputrāu father and
son, hotāpotārāu the invoker and purifier. Anyonya one another is a
fused phrase, of nominative and oblique case.
g. In a very few words, plural meaning is signified by plural form:
thus, apsuj"1
etc. (in derivation, also, apsu is used as a stem), hṛtsvás,
nṛṃhpraṇetra conducting men, rujaskara causing pains, (and dual)
hanūkampa trembling of the two jaws.
h. Much more often, of words having gender-forms, the feminine is
used in composition, when the distinctive feminine sense is to be conveyed:
e
» g* gopīnātha master of the shepherdesses, dāsīputra son of a female
slave, mṛgīdṛś gazelle-eyed, praṇītāpraṇáyana vessel for consecrated water.
1251. The accent of compounds is very various, and liable to
considerable irregularity even within the limits of the same formation;
and it must be left to be pointed out in detail below. A ll possible
varieties are found to occur. Thus:
a. Each member of the compound retains its own separate accent.
This is the most anomalous and infrequent method. It appears in certain
Vedic copulative compounds chiefly composed of the names of divinities
(so-called devatā-dvandvas: 1255 ff.), and in a small number of aggregations partly containing a genitive case-form as prior member (1267d).
b. The accent of the compound is that of its prior member. This is
especially the case in the great class of possessive compounds; but also in
determinatives having the participle in ta or na as final member, in those
beginning with the negative a or an, and in other less numerous and important classes.
c. The accent of the compound is that of the final member. This is
not on so large a scale the case as the preceding; but it is nevertheless
quite common, being found in many compounds having a verbal noun or
adjective as final member, in compounds beginning with the numerals dvi
and tri or the prefixes su and dus, and elsewhere in not infrequent exceptions.
d. The compound takes an accent of its own, independent of that of
either of its constituents, on its final syllable (not always, of course, to be
distinguished from the preceding case). This method is* largely followed:
especially, by the regular copulatives, and by the great mass of dependent
and descriptive noun-compounds, by most possessives beginning with the
negative prefix; and by others.
e. The compound has an accent which is altered from that of one of
its members. This is everywhere an exceptional and sporadically occurring
4 8 5 COPULATIV E CNMPOUNDS . [—1253
case, and the instances of it, noted below under each formation, do not
require to be assembled here. Examples are: medhásāti (médha), ti¬
lámiśra (tíla), khā́dihasta (khādí), yāvayáddveṣas (yāváyant);
śakadhū́ma (dhūmá), amṛ́ta (mṛtá), suvī́ra (vīrá), tuvigrī́va
(grīvā́). A few words — as víśva, pū́rva, and sometimes sárva —
take usually a changed accent as prior members of compounds.
I. Copulative Compounds.
1252. Two or more nouns — much less often adjectives, and, in an instance or two, adverbs — having a coordinate construction, as if connected by a conjunction, usually
and, are sometimes combined into compounds.
a. This is the class to which the Hindu grammarians give the
name of dvandva pair, couple; a dvandva of adjectives, however, is
not recognized by them.
b. Compounds in which the relation of the two members is alexamples are nyūnādhika defective or redundant, jayaparājaya victory
or defeat, krītotpanna purchased or on hand, kāṣṭhaloṣṭasama like a
log or clod, pakṣimṛgatā the condition of being bird or beast, triṃśadvinśa numbering twenty or thirty, catuṣpañcakṛtvas four or five times,
dvyekāntara different by one or two. A less marked modification of the
copulative idea is seen in such instances as priyasatya agreeable though
true, prārthitadurlabha sought after but hard to obtain; or in śrāntā¬
gata arrived weary.
1253. The noun-copulatives fall, as regards their inflective form, into two classes:
1. a. The compound has the gender and declension of
its final member, and is in number a dual or a plural,
according to its logical value, as denoting two or more
than two individual things.
b. Examples are: prāṇāpānāú inspiration and expiration, vrīhi¬
yavāú rice and barley, ṛksāmé verse and chant, kapotolūkāú dove
and owl, candrādityāu moon and sun, hastyaśvāu the elephant and
horse, ajāváyas goats and sheep, devāsurā́s the gods and demons,
atharvāṅgirásas the Atharvans and Angirases, sambādhatandryàs
anxieties andfatigues, vidyakarmáṇī knowledge and action, hastyaśvās
elephants and horses; of more than two members (no examples quotable
from the older language), śayyāsanabhogās lying, sitting, and eating,
brāhmaṇokṣatriyaviṭśūdrās a Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaiśya, and Śūdra,
1253--] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 486
rogaśokaparītāpabandhanavyasanāni disease, pain, grief, captivity,
and misfortune.
2. c. The compound, without regard to the number denoted, or to the gender of its constituents, becomes a neuter
singular collective.
d. Examples are: iṣṭāpūrtám what is offered and bestowed, aho¬
rātrám a day and night, kṛtākṛtám the done and undone, bhūtabhav¬
yám past and future, keśaśmaśrú hair and beard, oṣadhivanaspatí
plants and trees, candratārakám moon and stars, ahinakulam snake
and ichneumon, śirogrīvam head and neck, yūkāmakṣikamatkuṇam
lice, fiies, and bugs.
1254. a. Tbfot a stem in ṛ as prior member sometimes takes its
nominative form, in ā, was noticed above, 12501.
b. A stem as final member is sometimes changed to an a-form to
make a neuter collective: thus, chattropānaham an umbrella and a shoe.
c. The grammarians give rules as to the order of the elements composing a copulative compound: thus, that a more important, a briefer, a
vowel-initial member should stand first; and that one ending in a should
be placed last. Violations of them all, however, are not infrequent.
1255. In the oldest language (RV.), copulative compounds such
as appear later are quite rare, the class being chiefly represented
by dual combinations of the names of divinities and other personages,
and of personified natural objects.
a. In these combinations, each name has regularly and usually
the dual form, and its own accent; but, in the very rare instances
(only three occurrences out of more than three hundred) in which
other cases than the nom.-acc.-voc. are formed, the final member
only is inflected.
b. Examples are: índrāsómā, índrāvíṣṇū, índrābṛ́haspátī, agní¬
ṣómāu, turváśāyádū, dyā́vāpṛthivī́, uṣā́sānáktā (and, with intervening words, náktā... uṣā́sā), sū́ryāmā́sā. The only plural is indrā¬
marutas (voc). The cases of other than nominative form are mitrā́¬
váruṇābhyām and mitrā́váruṇayos (also mitráyor váruṇayoḥ), and
índrāváruṇayos (each once only).
c. From dyā́vāpṛthivī́ is made the very peculiar genitive diváspṛ¬
thivyós (4 times: AV. has dyā́vāpṛthivī́bhyām and dyā́vāpṛthivyós),
d. In one compound, parjányavā́tā, the first member (RV., once)
does not have the dual ending along with the double accent (indranā¬
satyā, voc, is doubtful as to accent). In several, the double accent is
wanting, while yet the double designation of number is present: thus,
indrāpūṣṇós (beside índrāpūsáṇā), somāpūṣábhyām (somāpūṣaṇā
occurs only as voo.), vātāparjanyā́, sūryācandramásā, and indrāgnī́
(with indrāgníbhyām and indrāgnyós):somārudrāú is accented only
487 COPULATIV E COMPOUNDS . [—1257
in ŚB. And in one, indravayū́, form and accent are both accordant with
the usages of the later language.
e. Of other copulatives, like those made later, the RV. has the plural
ajāváyas, the duals ṛksāmé, satyānṛté, sāśanānaśané; also the neuter collective iṣṭāpūrtám, and the substantively used neuter of a copulative adjective, nīlalohitám. Further, the neuter plurals ahorātrā́ṇi
nycthemera, and ukthārkā́ praises and songs, of which the final members
as independent words are not neuter. No one of these words has more than
a single occurrence.
1256. In the later Vedic (AV.), the usage is much more nearly
accordant with that of the classical language, save that the class of
neuter singular collectivesis almost wanting.
a. The words with double dual form are only "a small minority (a
quarter, instead of three quarters, as in RV.); and half of them have only
a single accent, on the final: thus, besides those in RV., bhavārudrāú,
bhavāśarvāú; agnāviṣṇū, voc, is of anomalous form. The whole number of copulatives is more than double that inRV.
b. The only proper neuter collectives, composed of two nouns, are
keśaśmaśrú hair and heard, āñjanābhyañjanám salve and ointment, and
kaśipūpabarhaṇám mat and pillow, unified because of the virtual unity
of the two objects specified. Neuter singulars, used in a similar collective
way, of adjective compounds, are (besides those in RV,): kṛtākṛtám what
is done and undone (instead of what is done and what is undone), cittā¬
kūtám thought and desire, bhadrapāpám good and evil, bhūtabhavyám
past and future.
1257. Copulative compounds composed of adjectives
whic h retain their adjective character are made i n the same
manner, but are i n comparison rare.
a. Examples are: śuklakṛṣṇa light and dark, sthalajāudaka terrestrial and aquatic, dāntarājatasāuvarṇa of ivory and silver and gold,
used distributive^; and vṛttapīna round and plump, śāntānukūla
tranquil and propitious, hṛṣitasragrajohīna wearing fresh garlands and
free from dust, niṣekādiśmaśānānta beginning with conception and
ending with burial, used cumulatively; nā 'tiśītoṣṇa not over cold or
hot, used alternatively; kṣaṇadṛṣṭanaṣṭa seen for a moment and then
lost, cintitopasthita at hand as soon as thought of, in more pregnant sense.
b. In the Veda, the only examples noted are the cumulative nīla¬
lohitá and iṣṭāpūrtá etc., used in the neut. sing, as collectives (as pointed out above), with tāmradhūmrá dark tawny; and the distributive
dakṣiṇasavyá right and left, saptamāṣṭamá seventh and eighth, and
bhadrapāpá good and bad (beside the corresponding neut. collective).
Such combinations as satyānṛté truth and falsehood, priyāpriyā́ṇi things
1257—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 488
agreeable and disagreeable, where each component is used substantively, are,
of course, not to be separated from the ordinary noun-compounds.
o. A special case is that of the compound adjectives of direction: as
uttarapūrva north-east, prāgdakṣiṇa south-east, dakṣiṇapaścima southwest, etc.: compare 1291b.
1258. In accentuated texts, the copulative compounds have uniformly the accent (acute) on the final ofthe stem.
a. Exceptions are a case or two in AV. , where doubtless the reading
is false: thus, vātāparjonya (once: beside –nyáyos), devamanuṣyas
(once: ŚB. -syá), brahmarājanyā̀bhyām (also VS.); further, vāko¬
pavokyà (ŚB,), aśanāyā́pipāse (ŚB.).
1259. An example or two are met with of adverbial copulatives:
thus, áhardivi day by day, sāyámprātar aí evening and in the morning.
They have the accent of their prior member. Later occur also bāhyantar,
pratyogdakṣiṇā, pratyagudak.
1260. Repeated words. In all ages of the language, nouns
and pronouns and adjectives and particles are not infrequently repeated, to give an intensive, or a distributive, or a repetitional meaning.
a. Though these are not properly copulative compounds, there is no
better connection in which to notice them than here. They are, as the
older language shows, a sort of compound, of which the prior member has
its own independent accent, and the other is without accent: hence they
are most suitably and properly written (as in the Vedic pada-texts) as
compounds. Thus: jahy êṣāṁ váraṁ-varam slay of them each best man;
divé-dive or dyávi-dyavi from day to day; áṅgād-aṅgāl lómno-lom¬
naḥ párvaṇi-parvaṇi from every limb, from every hair, in each joint;
prá-pra yajñápatiṁ tira make the master of the sacrifice live on and on;
bhū́yo-bhūyaḥ śváḥ-śvaḥ further and further, tomorrow and again tomorrow ; ékayāi-'kayā with in each case one; vayáṁ-vayam oar very
selves.
b. Exceptional and rare cases are those of a personal verb-form repeated: thus, píbā-piba (RV.), yájasva-yajasva (ŚB.), véda-veda
(? ŚB.)j —and of two words repeated: thus, yā́vad vā-yāvad vā (ŚB.),
yatamé vā-yatame vā (ŚB,).
c. In a few instances, a word is found used twice in succession without that loss of accent the second time which makes the repetition a virtual composite: thus, nū́ nú (RV.), sáṁ sám (AV.), ihé 'há (AV.),
anáyā- 'náyā (ŚB.), stuhí stuhí (RV., acc. to pada-text).
d. The class of combinations here described is called by the native
grammarians āmreḍita added unto (?).
1261. Finally may be noticed in passing the compound numerals,
ékādaśa 11, dvā́viṃśati 22, tríśata 103, cátuḥsahasra 1004, and
so on (476 ff.), as a special and primitive class of copulatives. They are
accented on the prior member.
489 DETERMINATIVE COMPOUNDS. [—1264
II. Determinative Compounds.
1262. A noun or adjective is often combined into a
compound with a preceding determining or qualifying word
— a noun, or adjective, or adverb. Such a compound is
conveniently called determinative.
1263. This is the class of compounds which is of most
general and frequent occurrence in all branches of IndoEuropean language. Its two principal divisions have been
already pointed out: thus, A. Dependent compounds, in
which the prior member is a substantive word (noun or pronoun or substantively used adjective), standing to the other
member in the relation of a case dependent on it; and
B, Descriptive compounds, in which the prior member is
an adjective, or other word having the value of an adjective, qualifying a noun; or else an adverb or its equivalent,
qualifying an adjective. Each of these divisions then falls
into two sub-divisions, according as the final member, and
therefore the whole compound, is a noun or an adjective.
a. The whole class of determinatives is called by the Hindu
grammarians tatpuruṣa (the term is a specimen of the class, meaning his man); and the second division, the descriptives, has the
special name of karmadhāraya (of obscure application: the literal
sense is something like office-bearing). After their example, the two
divisions are in European usage widely known by these two names
respectively.
A . Dependent Compounds.
1264. Dependent Noun-compounds. In this division, the ease-relation of the prior member to the other
may be of any kind; but, in accordance with the usual relations of one noun to another, it is oftenest genitive, and
least often accusative.
a. Examples are: of genitive relation, devasenā́ army of gods,
yamadūtá Tama's messenger, jīvaloká the world of the living, indra-
1264-] XVIII. COMPOSITION. 490
dhanús 1ndra's bow, brahmagavī́ the Brahman's cow, viṣagirí poisonmount, mitralābha acquisition of friends, mūrkhaśatāni hundreds of
fools, vīrasenasuta Vī́rasena's son, rājendra chief of kings, asmat¬
putrās our sons, tadvacas his words; — of dative, pādodaka water for
the feet, māsanicaya accumulation for a month; — of instrumental, āt¬
masādṛśya likeness with self, dhānyārtha wealth acquired by grain,
dharmapatnī lawful spouse, pitṛbondhú paternal relation; — of ablative,
apsaraḥsambhava descent from a nymph, madviyoga separation from
me, cāurabhaya fear of a thief; — of locative, jalakrīḍā sport in the
water, grāmavāsa abode in the village, puruṣānṛta untruth about a man;
— of accusative, nogarogamana going to the city.
1265. Dependent Adjective-compounds. In
this division, only a very small proportion of the compounds
have an ordinary adjective as final member; but usually a
participle, or a derivative of agency with the value of a
participle. The prior member stands in any case-relation
which is possible in the independent construction of such
words.
a. Examples are: of locative relation, sthālīpakva cooked in a pot,
aśvakovida knowing in horses, vayaḥsama alike in age, yudhiṣṭhira
steadfast in battle, tanū́śubhr a beautiful in body; — of instrumental,
mātṛsadṛśa like his mother; — of dative, gohita good for cattle; — of
ablative, bhavadanya other than you, garbhāṣṭama eighth from birth,
dṛśyetara other than visible (i. e. invisible); — of genitive, bharataśreṣṭha
best of the Bharatas, dvijottama foremost of Brahmans: — with participial words, in accusative relation, vedavid Veda-knowing, annādá foodeating, tanūpā́na body-protecting, satyavādín truth-speaking, pattragāta
committed to paper (lit. gone to a leaf); — in instrumental, madhupū́
cleansing with honey, svayáṁkṛta self-made, indragupta protected by
Indra, vidyāhīna deserted by (i. e. destitute of) knowledge; — in locative, hṛdayāvídh pierced in the heart, ṛtvíj sacrificing in due season,
divicara moving in the sky; — in ablative, rājyabhraṣṭa fallen from
the kingdom, vṛkabhīta afraid of a wolf; — in dative, śaraṇāgata come
for refuge.
1266. We take up now some of the principal groups of compounds falling under these two heads, in order to notice their specialities of formation and use, their relative frequency, their accentuation,
and so on.
1267. Compounds having as final member ordinary nouns (such,
namely, as do not distinctly exhibit the character of verbal nouns,
of action or agency) are quite common. They are regularly and usually accented on the final syllable, without reference to the accent of
either constituent. Examples were given above (1264 a).
491 DEPENDENT COMPOUNDS. [—1270
a. A principal exception with regard to accent is páti master, lord
(and its feminine pátnī), compounds with which usually retain the accent
of the prior member: thus, prajā́pati, vásupati, átithipati, gópati,
gṛhápatnī, etc. etc. (compare the verbal nouns in ti, below, 1274). But
in a few words páti retains its own accent: thus, viśpáti, rayipáti,
paśupáti, vasupátnī, etc; and the more general rule is foUowed in
apsarāpatí and vrājapatí (AV.), and nadīpatí (VS.), citpatf (MS.;
elsewhere citpáti).
b. Other exceptions are sporadic only: for example, janarajan, deva¬
várman, hiraṇyatéjas, pṛtanāháva, godhū́ma and śakadhū́ma (but
dhūmá); vācā́stena.
c. The appearance of a case-form in such compounds is rare: examples
are dívodāsa, vācā́stena, uccāíḥśravas, uccāírghoṣa, dūrébhās
(the three last in possessive application).
d. A number of compounds are accented on both members: thus,
śácīpáti, sádaspáti, bṛ́haspáti, vánaspáti, ráthaspáti, jā́spáti (also
jā́spati), nárāśáṃsa, tánūnáptṛ, tánūnápāt (tanū́ as independent word),
śúnaḥśépa. And ŚB. has a long list of metronymics having the anomalous accentuation kāútsīpútra, gā́rgīpútra, etc.
1268. The compounds having an ordinary adjective as final member are (as already noticed) comparatively few.
a. So far as can be gathered from the scanty examples occurring in
the older language, they retain the accent of the prior member: thus,
gáviṣṭhira (AV. gavíṣṭhira), tanū́śubhra, máderaghu, yajñádhīra,
sā́mavipra, tilámiśra (but tíla); but kṛṣṭapacyá ripening in cultivated soil.
1269. The adjective dependent compounds having as final member the bare root — or, if it end in a short vowel, generally with
an added t — are very numerous in all periods of the language, as
has been already repeatedly noticed (thus, 383 f—h, 1147). They are
accented on the root.
a. In a very few instances, the accent of words having apparently or
conjecturally this origin is otherwise laid: thus, áṃsatra, ánarviś, svā́vṛj,
pratyákṣadṛś, púraṁdhi, óṣadhi, áramiṣ, uśádagh, vatsápa, ábda.
b. Bofore a final root-stem appears not very seldom a case-form: for
example, pataṁgá, girāvṛ́dh, dhiyājúr, akṣṇayādrúh, hṛdispṛ́ś,
divispṛ́ś, vanesáh, diviṣád, aṅgeṣṭhā́, hṛtsvás, pṛtsutúr, apsujá.
0. The root-stem has sometimes a middle or passive value: for example, manoyúj yoked (yoking themselves) by the will, hṛdayāvídh
pierced to the heart, manuja born of Manu.
1270. Compounds made with verbal derivatives in a‚ both of
action and of agency, are numerous, and take the accent usually on
their final syllable (as in the case of compounds with verbal prefixes:
1148m).
1270-] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 492
a. Examples are: hastagrābhá hand-grasping, devavandá godpraising, haviradá devouring the offering, bhuvanacyavá shaking the
world, vrātyabruvá calling one's self a vrātya; akṣaparājayá failure
at play, vaṣaṭkārá utterance of vashaṭ, gopoṣá prosperity in cattle,
aṅgajvará pain in the limbs.
b. In a few instances, the accent is (as in compounds with ordinary
adjectives: above, 1268) that of the prior member: thus, marúdvṛdha,
sutékara, divícara (and other more questionable words). And dúgha
milking, yielding is so accented as final: thus, madhudúgha, kāmadúgha.
c. Case-forms are especially frequent in the prior members of compounds
with adjective derivatives in a showing guṇa-strengthening of the root:
thus, for example, abhayaṁkará, yudhiṁgamá, dhanaṁjayá, puraṁ¬
dará, viśvambharà, divākará, talpeśayá, diviṣṭambhá.
1271. Compounds with verbal nouns and adjectives in ana are
very numerous, and have the accent always on the radical syllable
(as in the case of compounds with verbal prefixes: 1150e).
a. Examples are: keśavárdhana hair-increasing, āyuṣpratáraṇa
life-lengthening, tanūpā́na body-protecting; devahéḍana hatred of the gods,
puṁsúvana giving birth to males.
b. A very few apparent exceptions as regards accent are really cases
where the derivative has lost its verbal character: thus, yamasādaná Yama's
realm, āchádvidhāna means of protection.
c. An accusative-form is sometimes found before a derivative in ana:
thus, sarūpaṁkáraṇa, ayakṣmaṁkáraṇa, subhāgaṁkáraṇa, vanaṁ¬
káraṇa.
1272. a. The action-nouns in ya (1213; are not infrequent in
composition as final member, and retain their own proper accent (as
in combination with prefixes). Sufficient examples were given above
(1213).
b. The same is true of the equivalent feminines in yā́: see above,
1213d.
c. The gerundives in ya (1213) hardly occur in the older language
in combination with other elements than prefixes. The two nīvibhāryà
and prathamavāsyà (the latter a descriptive) have the accent of the
independent words of the same form; balavijñāyá and áśvabudhya (?)
are inconsistent with these and with one another.
1273. Compounds made with the passive participle in ta or na
have the accent of their prior member (as do the combinations of the
same words with prefixes: 1085a).
a. Examples are: hástakṛta made with the hand, vīrájāta born of a
hero, ghóṣabuddha awakened by noise, prajā́patisṛṣṭa created by Prajāpati,
devátta given by the gods; and, of participles combined with prefixes,
índraprasūta incited by Indra, bṛ́haspátipraṇutta driven away by
Brihaspati, ulkā́bhihata struck by a thunderbolt, vájravihata, soṁvat-
493 DEPENDENT COMPOUNDS. [—1276
sarásammita commensurate with the year. AV. has the anomalous apsú¬
saṁśita quickened by the waters.
b. A number of exceptions occur, in which the final syllable of the
compound has the accent: for example, agnitaptá, indrotá, pitṛvittá,
rathakrītá, agnidagdhá (beside agnídagdha), kaviśastá (beside kaví¬
śasta), kavipraśastá.
c. One or two. special usages may be noticed. The participle gata,
gone to, as final of a compound, is used in a loose way in the later language to express relation of various kinds: thus, jagatīgata existing in the
world, tvadgata belonging to thee, sakhīgata relating to a friend, citra¬
gata in a picture, putragataṁ sneham affection toward a son, etc. The
participle bhūta been, become is used in composition with a noun as hardly
more than a grammatical device to give it an adjective form: thus, idaṁ
tamobhūtam this creation, being darkness (existing in the condition of
darkness); tāṁ ratnabhūtāṁ lokasya her, being the pearl of the world;
kṣetrabhūtā smṛtā nārī bījabhūtaḥ smṛtaḥ pumān a woman is
regarded as a field; a man, as seed; and so on.
d. The other participles only seldom occur as finals of compounds:
thus, prāsakārmukabibhrat bearing javelin and bow, aśāstravidvāṃs
not knowing the text-books, arjunadarśivāṃs having seen Arjuna, apriya¬
śaṃsivāṃs announcing what is disagreeable, gāutamabruvāṇá calling
himself Gautama.
1274. Compounds with derivatives in ti have (like combinations
with the prefixes: 1157e) the accent of the prior member.
a. Examples are: dhánasāti winning of wealth, sómapīti somadrinking, deváhūti invocation of the gods, námaükti utterance of homage,
havyádāti presentation of offerings; and SO tokásāti, deváhiti, rudráhūti,
sūktókti, svagā́kṛti, díviṣṭi.
b. In nemádhiti, medhásāti, vanádhiti (all RV.), the accent of
the prior member is changed from penult to final.
c. Where the verbal character of the derivative is lost, the general
rule of final accent (1267) is followed: thus, devaheti weapon of the gods,
devasumati favor of the gods, brahmaciti Brahman-pile. Also in sar¬
vajyāní entire ruin, the accent is that of compounds with ordinary nouns.
1275. Compounds with a derivative in in as final member have
(as in all other cases) the accent on the in.
a. Thus, ukthaśaṃsín psalm-singing, vratacārín vow-performing,
ṛṣabhadāyín bullock-giving, satyavādín truth-speaking, śroṇipratodín
thigh-pounding.
1276. There is a group of compounds with derivatives in i,
having the accent on the penult or radical syllable.
a. Thus, pathirákṣi road-protecting, havirmáthi sacrifice-disturbing,
ātmadū́ṣì soul-harming, pathiṣádi sitting in the path, sahobhári strength-
1276--] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 494
bearing, vasuváni winning good-things, dhanasáni gaining wealth, manomúṣi mind-stealing, phalagráhi setting fruit; and, from reduplicated root,
urucákri making room. Compounds with -sáni and -váni are especially
frequent in Veda and Brāhmaṇa; as independent words, nouns, these are
accented sani and vani. In many cases, the words are not found in
independent use. Combinations with prefixes do not occur in sufficient
numbers to establish a distinct rule, but they appear to be oftenest accented
on the suffix (1155f).
b. From √han are made in composition -ghni and -ghnī, with
accent on the ending: thus, sahasraghní, ahighnī́, śvaghnī́; -dhi from
√dhā (1155 g) has the accent in its numerous compounds: thus, iṣudhí,
garbhadhí, pucchadhí.
1277. Compounds with derivatives in van have (like combinations with prefixes: 1169c) the accent of the final member: namely,
on the radicalsyllable.
a. Thus, somapā́van soma-drinking, baladā́van strength-giving,
pāpakṛ́tvan evil-doing, bahusū́van much-yielding, talpaśī́van lying on
a couch, rathayā́van going in a chariot, druṣádvan sitting on a tree,agrétvarī f. going at the head. The accent of the obscure words māta¬
ríśvan and xnātaríbhvan is anomalous.
b. The few compounds with final man appear to follow the same rule
as those with van: thus, svādukṣádman sharing outsweets, āśuhémon
steed-impelling.
1278. Compounds with other derivatives, of rare or sporadic occurrence,
may be briefly noticed: thus, in u, rāṣṭradipsú, devapīyú, govindú,
vanargú (?): compare 1178e; — in nu or tnu, lokakṛtnú, surū¬
pakṛtnú: compare 1196; — in tṛ, nṛpātṛ́, mandhātṛ́, haskartṛ́ (vasu¬
dhā́taras, AV., is doubtless a false reading). The derivatives in as are
of infrequent occurrence in composition (as in combination with prefixes:
above, 1151k), and appear to be treated as ordinary nouns: thus, yajña¬
vacás (but hiraṇyatéjas, AV.).
B . Descriptive Compounds.
1279. In this division of the class of determinatives,
the prior member stands to the other in no distinct caserelation, but qualifies it adjectively or adverbially, according as it (the final member) is noun or adjective.
a. Examples are: nīlotpala blue lotus, sarvaguṇa all good quality,
priyasakha dear friend, maharṣí great-sage, rajatapātrá silver cup;
ájṃāta unknown, súkṛta well done, duṣkṛ́t ill-doing, puruṣṭutá much
praised, púnarṇava renewed.
b. The prior member is not always an adjective before a noun, or
495 DESCRIPTIV E COMPOUNDS. L—1280
an adverb before an adjective; other parts of speech are sometimes used
adjectively and adverbially in that position.
c. The boundary between descriptive and dependent compounds is not
an absolute one; in certain casesit is open to question, for instance, whether
a prior noun, or adjective with noun-value, is used more in a case-relation,
or adverbially.
d. Moreover, where the final member is a derivative having both noun
and adjective value, it is not seldom doubtful whether an adjective compound is to be regarded as descriptive, made with final adjective, or possessive, made with final noun. Sometimes the accent of the word determines
its character in this respect, but not always.
e. A satisfactorily simple and perspicuous classification of the descriptive compounds is not practicable ; we cannot hold apart throughout the compounds of noun and of adjective value, but may better group both together,
as they appear with prefixed elements of various kinds.
1280. The simplest case is that in which a noun as
final member is preceded by a qualifying adjective as prior
member.
a. In this combination, both noun and adjective may be of any
kind, verbal or otherwise. The accent is (as in the corresponding
class of dependent noun-compounds: 1267) on the final syllable.
b. Thus, ajñātayakṣmá unknown disease, mahādhaná great wealth,
kṣipraśyená swift hawk, kṛṣṇaśakuní black bird, dakṣiṇāgní southern
fire, urukṣití wide abode, adharahanú lower jaw, itarajaná other folks,
sarvātmán whole soul, ekavīrá sole hero, saptarṣí seven sages, tṛtīya¬
savaná third libation, ekonaviṃśatí a score diminished by one, jāgrat¬
svapná waking sleep, yāvayatsakhá defending friend, apokṣīyamāṇa¬
pakṣá loaning half.
C There are not a few exceptions as regards accent. Especially, compounds with víśva (in composition, accented viśvá), which itself retains
the accent: thus, viśvádevās all the gods, viśvámānuṣa every man. For
words in ti, see below, 1287 d. Sporadic cases are madhyáṁdina,
vṛṣā́kapi, both of which show an irregular shift of tone in the prior
member; and a few others.
d. Instead of an adjective, the prior member is in a few cases
a noun used appositionaliy, or with a quasi-adjective value. Thus,
rājayakṣmá king-disease, brahmarṣi priest-sage, rājorṣi king-sage,
rājadanta king-tooth, devajana god-folk, duhitṛjana daughter-person,
śamīlatā creeper named śamī, muṣikākhyā the name "mouse", jaya¬
śabda the word "conquer", ujhitaśabda the word "deserted"; or, more
figuratively, gṛhanaraka house-hell (house which is a hell), śāpāgni
curse-fire (consuming curse).
e. This group is of consequence, inasmuch as in possessive application
1280-] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 496
it is greatly extended, and forms a numerous class of appositional compounds: see below, 1302.
f. This whole subdivision, of nouns with preceding qualifying adjectives, is not uncommon; but it is greatly (in AV., for example, more than
five times) exceeded in frequency by the sub-class of possessives of the
same form: see below, 1298.
1281. The adverbial words which are most freely and
commonly used as prior members of compounds, qualifying
the final member, are the verbal prefixes and the words of
direction related with them, and the inseparable prefixes,
a or an, su, dus, etc. (1121). These are combined not
only with adjectives, but also, in quasi-adjectival value,
with nouns; and the two classes of combinations will best
be treated together.
1282. Verbal adjectives and nouns with preceding
adverbs. As the largest and most important class under this head
might properly enough be regarded the derivatives with preceding
verbal prefixes. These, however, have been here reckoned rather
as derivatives from roots combined with prefixes (1141), and have
been treated under the head of derivation, in the preceding chapter.
In taking up the others, we will begin with the participles.
1283. The participles belonging to the tense-systems — those
in ant (or at), māna, āna, vaṃs — are only rarely compounded with
any other adverbial element than the negative a or an, which then
takes the accent.
a. Examples are: ánadant, ádadat, ánaśnant, ásravant, álubh¬
yant, ádāsyant, áditsant, ádevayant; ámanyamāna, áhiṃsāna,
áchidyamāna; ádadivāṃs, ábibhīvāṃs, atasthāna; and, with verbal
prefixes, ánapasphurant, ánāgamiṣyant, ánabhyāgamiṣyant, ávi¬
rādhayant, ávicācalat, ápratimanyūyamāna.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are very few: arundhatī́, ajárontī,
acodánt (RV., once: doubtless a false reading; the simple participle is
códant); AV. has anipádyamāna for RV. ánipadyamāna (and the
published text has asaṁyánt, with a part of the manuscripts); ŚB. has
àkāmáyamāna.
c Of other compounds than with the negative prefix have been noted
in the Veda -punardīyamāna (in ápunard-) and súvidvāṃs. In alalā¬
bhávant and jañjanābhávant (RV.), as in astaṁyánt and astameṣyánt
(AV.), we have participles of a compound conjugation (1091), in which,
as has been pointed out, the accent is as in combinations with the verbal
prefixes.
497 DESCRIPTIV E COMPOUNDS. [—1285
1284. The passive (or past) participle in ta or na is much more
variously compounded; and in general (as in the case of the verbal
prefixes: 1085a) the preceding adverbial element has the accent.
a* Thus, with the negative a or an (by far the most common case):
ákṛta, ádabdha, áriṣṭa, ánādhṛṣṭa, áparājita, ásaṁkhyāta, ána¬
bhyārūḍha, áparimitasamṛddha; — with su, sújāta, súhuta, súsaṁ¬
śita, svàraṁkṛta; — with dus, dúścarita, dúrdhita and dúrhita,
dúḥśṛta; — with other adverbial words, dáṃsujūta, návajāta, sána¬
śruta, svayáṁkṛta, trípratiṣṭhita: áraṁkṛta and kakajā́kṛta are
rather participles of a compound conjugation.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are: with a or an, anāśastá, apra¬
śastá, and, with the accent of the participle retracted to the root, amṛ́ta,
adṛ́ṣṭa, acítta, ayúta myriad, atū́rta (beside átūrta), asū́rta (? beside
sū́rta); — with su (nearly half as numerous as the regular cases), sūbhūtà,
sūktá, supraśastà, svā́kta, sukṛtá and sujātá (beside súkṛta and
sújāta), and a few others; with dus (quite as numerous as the regular
cases), duritá (also dúrita), duruktá, duṣkṛtá (also dúṣkṛta), dur¬
bhūtá; with sa, sajātá; with other adverbs, amotá, ariṣṭutá, tuvijātá,
prācīnopavītá, tadānīṁdugdhá, prātardugdhá, etc., and the compounds with puru, purujātá, puruprajàtá, purupraśastá, puruṣṭutá,
etc., and with svayam, svayaṁkṛtá etc. The proper name aṣāḍhá
stands beside áṣāḍha; and A V. has abhinná for Ry. ábhinna.
1285. The gerundives occur almost only in combination with
the negative prefix, and have usually the accent on the final syllable.
a. Examples are: anāpyá, anindyá, abudhyá, asahyá, ayodhyá,
amokyá; adviṣeṇyá; ahnavāyyá; and, along with verbal prefixes, the
cases are asaṁkhyeyá, apramṛṣyá, anapavṛjyá, anatyudyá, anā¬
dhṛṣyá, avimokyá, anānukṛtyá (the accent of the simple word being
saṁkhyéya etc.).
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are: ánedya, ádābhya, ágohya,
ájoṣya, áyabhya. The two anavadharṣyà and anativyādhyà (both AV.)
belong to the yà-division (1213b) of gerundives, and have retained the
accent of the simple word. And ághnya and aghnyá occur together.
c. The only compounds of these words with other adverbial elements
in V. are suyabhya (accented like its twin áyabhya) and prathamavāsyà
(which retains the final circumflex), and perhaps ekavādyà.
d. The neuter nouns of the same form (1213 c: except sadhástutya)
retain their own accent after an adverbial prior member: thus, purvapā́yya,
pūrvapéya, amutrabhū́ya; and sahaśéyya. And the negatived gerundives
instanced above are capable of being viewed as possessive compounds with
such nouns,
e. Some of the other verbal derivatives which have rules of
their own as to accent etc may bo next noticed.
1286—] XVIII. COMPOSITION. 498
1286. The root-stem (pure root, or with t added after a short
final vowel 1147 d) is very often combined with a preceding adverbial
word, of various kinds; and in the combination it retains the accent.
a. Examples are with inseparable prefixes, adrúh not harming, asū́
not giving birth, arúc not shining ‚ sukṛ́t well-doing, suśrút hearing well,
duṣkṛ́t ill-doing, dūḍā́ś (199d) impious, sayúj joining together, samád
conflict, sohajā́ boin together, sahaváh carrying together, — with other
adverbs, amājúr growing old at home, uparispṛ́ś touching upward,
punarbhū́ appearing again, prātaryúj harnessed early, sadyaḥkrī́ bought
the same day, sākaṁvṛ́dh growing up together, sadaṁdí ever-binding,
viṣūvṛ́t turning to both sides, vṛthāsáh easily overcoming, — with adjectives used adverbially, uruvyác wide-spreading,prathamajā́first-born,
raghuṣyád swift-moving, navasū́ newly giving birth, ekajá only born,
śukrapíś brightly adorned, dvijá twice born, trivṛ́t triple, svarā́j selfruling; — with nouns used adverbially, śambhū́ beneficent, sūryaśvít
shining like the sun, īśānakṛ́t acting as lord, svayambhū́self-existent,
and, with accusative case-form, pataṁgá going by flight.
b. When, however, a root-stem is already m composition, whether
wtih a verbal prefix or an element of other character, the further added
negative itself takes the accent (as in case of an ordinary adjective* below,
1288 a): thus, for example, ánākṣit not abiding, ánāvṛt not turning back,
ávidviṣ not showing hostility, áduṣkṛt not itl-doing, ánaśvadā not giving
a horse, ápaśuhan not slaying cattle (anāgā́s would be an exception, if
it contained √gā: which is very unlikely). Similar combinations with su
seem to retain the radical accent thus, supratúr, svabhū́, svāyúj:
svā́vṛj is an unsupported exception.
c A few other exceptions occur, mostly of doubtful character, as
prátiprāś, sadhástha, ádhrigu, and the words having one as final
member (407 ff,: if this element is not, after all, a suffix) compare 1269 a.
1287. Other veibal derivatives, requiring to be treated apart
from the general body of adjectives, are few and of minor importance. Thus
a. The derivatives in a are in great part of doubtful character, because
of the possibility of their being used with substantive value to make a possessive compound. The least ambiguous, probably, are the derivatives from
present-stems (1148 j), which have the accent on the suffix thus, asunvá,
apaśyá, akṣudhyá, avidasyá, onāmṛṇá, sadāpṛṇá, punarmanyá;
and with them belong such cases as atṛpá, avṛdhá, araṁgamá, urukramá,
evāvadá, satrāsahá, punaḥsará, puraḥsará; and the nouns sāyam¬
bhavá, sahacārá, prātaḥsāvá, mithoyodhá. Differently accented, on
the other hand, although apparently of the same formation, are such as
ánapasphura, ánavahvara (compare the compounds noticed at 1286 b),
sadā́vṛdha, sū́bharva, nyagródha, puroḍā́śa, sadhamada, sudúgha,
supáca, suháva, and others. Words like adábha, durháṇa, sukára,
suyáma, are probably possessives.
DESCRIPTIV E COMPOUNDS. [—1288
b. The derivatives in van keep in general the accent of the final
member, on the root (compare 1169 c, 1277): thus, āśupátvan and
raghupátvan swift-flying, puroyā́van going in front, sukṛ́tvan welldoing; and sutárman and suváhman and raghuyā́man are probably to
be classed with them. But the negative prefix has the accent even before
these: thus, áyajvan, árāvan, áprayutvan; and satyámadvan (if it
be not possessive) has the accent of its prior member.
c. A few words in i seem to have (as in dependent compounds : 1276)
the accent on the radical syllable: thus, durgṛ́bhi, ṛjuváni, tuviṣváṇi.
d. The derivatives in ti are variously treated: the negative prefix has
always the accent before them: as, ácitti, ábhūti, ánāhūti; with su and
dus, the compound is accented now on the prefix and now on the final, and
in some words on either (súnīti and sunītí, dúṣṭuti and duṣṭutí); with
other elements, the accent of the prefix prevails: thus, sáhuti, sadhástuti,
puróhiti, pūrvápīti, pūrvyástuti.
e. The derivatives in in have, as in general, the accent on the suffix:
thus, pūrvāsín, bahucārín, sādhudevín, savāsín, kevalādín. But,
with the negative prefix, ánāmin, ávitārin.
f. Other combinations are too various in treatment, or are represented
by too few examples in accentuated texts, to justify the setting up of rules
respecting them,
1288. Of the remaining combinations, those made with the inseparable prefixes form in some measure a class by themselves.
I. a. The negative prefix a or an, when it directly negatives
the word to which it is added, has a very decided tendency to take
the accent.
b. We have seen above (1283) that it does so even in the case of
present and perfect and future participles, although these in combination
with a verbal prefix retain their own accent (1085: but there are exceptions,
as avadánt, apaśyánt, etc. ŚB.); and also in the case of a root-stem, if
this be already compounded with another element (1286 b). And the same
is true of its other combinations.
c. Thus, with various adjective words: átandra, ádabhra, ádāśuri,
ánṛju, ádevayu, átṛṣṇaj, átavyāṃa, ánāmin, ádvayāvin, ápracetas,
ánapatyavant, ánupadasvant, ápramāyuka, ámamri, áprajajñi,
ávidīdhayu, ánagnidagdha, ákāmakarśana, ápaścāddaghvan. Further, with nouns, ápati, ákumāra, ábrāhmaṇa, ávidyā, āśraddhā,
ávrātya.
d. But there are a number of exceptions, in which the accent is on
the final syllable, without regard to the original accentuation of the final
member: thus, for example, acitrá, aśrīrá, aviprá, ayajñiyá, anā¬
smāká, asthūrí, anāśú, ajarayú, anāmayitnú; and in amítra enemy,
and avī́ra unmanly, there is a retraction of the accent from the final syllable
of the final member to its penult.
4 9 9
1288—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 500
2. e. The prefixes su and dus have this tendency in a much
less degree, and their compounds are very variously accented, now
on the prefix, now on the final syllable, now on the accented syllable
of the final member; and occasionally on either of two syllables.
f. Thus, for example, súbhadra, súvipra, súpakva, súbrāhmaṇa,
súbhiṣaj; sutīrthá, suvasaná, suṣārathí, supāśá, sucitrá; suśéva,
suhótṛ: suvī́ra islike avī́ra; — durmitrá, duṣvápnya; and ducchúnā
(168 b), with irregular retraction of accent (śuná),
3. g. The compounds with sa are too few to furnish occasion for
separate mention; and those with the interrogative prefix in its various
forms are also extremely rare in the Veda: examples are kucará, kat¬
payá, kábandha, kunannamá, kumārá, kúyava, kuṣáva.
1289. The verbal prefixes are sometimes used in a general adverbial way, qualifying a following adjective or noun.,
a. Examples of such combinations are not numerous in the Veda.
Their accentuation is various, though the tone rests oftenest on the preposition. Thus, ádhipati over-lord, áparūpa mis-form, prátiśatru opposing foe, prápada fore part of foot, práṇapāt great-grandchild, vipakva
quiie done, sámpriya mutually dear; upajíhvikā side tongue (with retraction
of the accent of jihvā́); antardeśá intermediate direction, pradiv forward
heaven, prapitāmahá (also prápitāmaha) great-grandfather, pratijaná
opponent vyadhvá midway. These compounds are more frequent with
possessive value (below, 1305),
b. This use of the verbal prefixes is more common later, and some of
them have a regular value in such compounds. Thus, ati denotes excess,
as in atidūra very far, atibhaya exceeding fear, átipūruṣa (ŚB.) chief
man; adhi, superiority, as in adhidonta upper-tooth, adhistrī chiefwoman;
abhi is intensive, as in abhinamra much incliving, abhinava span-new,
abhirucira delightful; ā signifies somewhat, as in ākuṭila somewhat crooked,
ānīla bluish; upa denotes something accessory or secondary, as in upa¬
purāṇa additional Purāna; pari, excess, as in paridurbala very weak;
prati, opposition, as in pratipaksa opposing side, pratipustaka copy;
vi‚ variation or excess, as in vidūra very far, vipāṇḍu gieyish, vikṣudra
respectively small; sam, completeness, as in sampakva quite ripê.
1290. Other compounds with adverbial prior members are quite irregularly accented.
Thus, the compounds with puru, on the final (compare the participles
with puru, 1284b): as, purudasmá, purupriyá, puruścondrá; those
with púnar, on the prior member, as púnarṇava, púnarmagha, púnar¬
yuvan, púnarvasu (but punaḥsará eK); those with satás, satīná,
satyá, the same, as satómahant, satīnámanyu, satyámugra; a few
combinations of nouns in tṛ and ana with adverbs akin with the prefixes,
on the final syllable, as puraêtṛ́, puraḥsthātṛ́, upariśayaná, prātaḥsa¬
vaná; and miscellaneous cases are mithóavadyapa, háriścandra, álpa¬
śayu, sādhvaryá, yācchreṣṭhá and yāvacchreṣṭhá, jyógāmayāvin.
501 SECONDAR Y ADJECTIV E COMPOUNDS. [-—1293
1291. One or two exceptional cases may be noted, as follows:
a. An adjective is sometimes preceded by a noun standing toward it
in a quasi-adverbial relation expressive of comparison or likeness: e. g.
śúkababhru (VS.) parrot-brown, ū́rṇāmṛdu (TB.) soft as wool, prāṇa¬
priya dear as life, kuśeśayarajomṛdu soft as lotus-pollen, bakālīna
hidden like a heron, mattamātaṅgagāmin moving like a maddened elephant.
b. An adjective is now and then qualified by another adjective: e. g.
kṛṣṇāita dark-gray, dhūmrárohita grayish red: and compare the adjectives of intermediate direction, 1257 c.
c. The adjective pūrva is in the later language frequently used as
final member of a compound in which its logical value is that of an adverb
qualifying the other member (which is said to retain its own accent). Thus,
dṛṣṭapūrva previously seen, parmītapūrva already married, aparijñā¬
tapūrva not before known, somapītapūrva having formerly drunk soma,
strīpūrva formerly a woman.
III. Secondary Adjective Compounds.
1292. a. A compound having a noun as its final member very often wins secondarily the value of an adjective,
being inflected in the three genders to agree with the noun
which it qualifies, and used in all the constructions of an
adjective.
b. This class of compounds, as was pointed out above
(1247. III.), falls into the two divisions of A. Possessives,
having their adjective character given them by addition of
the idea of possessing; and B. those in which the final
member is syntactically dependent on or governed by the
prior member.
A. Possessive Compounds.
1293. The possessives are noun-compounds of the preceding class, determinatives, of all its various subdivisions,
to which is given an adjective inflection, and which take
on an adjective meaning of a kind which is most conveniently and accurately defined by adding having or possessing to the meaning of the determinative.
a. Thus: the dependent sūryatejás sun's brightness becomes the
1293—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 502
possessive sū́ryatejas possessing the brightness of the sun; yajñakāmá
desire of sacrifice becomes yajñákāma having desire of sacrifice; the
descriptive bṛhadratha great chariot becomesthe possessive bṛhád¬
ratha having great chariots; áhasta not hand becomes ahastá handless;
durgandhi ill savor becomes durgándhi of ill savor; and SO on.
b. A copulative compound is not convertible into an adjective directly,
any more than is a simple noun, but requires, like the latter, a possessive
suffix or other means: e. g. vāgghastavant, doṣaguṇin, rajastamaska,
aśirogrīva, anṛgyajus. A very small number of exceptions, however,
are found: thus, somendrá (TS.), stómapṛṣṭha (VS. TS.), hastyṛṣabha
(ŚB.), dāsīniṣka (ChU.), and, later, cakramusala, sadānanda, saccid¬
ānanda, saṅkhyayoga (as n. pr.), balābala, bhūtabhāutika.
c The name given by the native grammarians to the possessive compounds is bahuvrīhi: the word is an example of the class, meaning possessing much rice.
d. The name "relative", instead of possessive, sometimes applied to
this class, is an utter misnomer; since, though the meaning of such a compound (as of any attributive word) is easily cast into a relative form, its
essential character lies in the possessive verb which has nevertheless to be
added, or in the possessive case of the relative which must be used: thus,
mahōkavi and āyurdā, descriptive and dependent, are "relative" also,
who is a great poet, and that is life-giving, but bṛhadratha, possessive,
means who has a great chariot, or whose is a great chariot.
1294. a. That a noun, simple or compound, should be added to another noun, in an appositive way, with a value virtually attributive, and that
such nouns should occasionally gain by frequent association and application
an adjective form also, is natural enough, and occurs in many languages;
the peculiarity of the Sanskrit 'formation lies in two things. First, that
such use should have become a perfectly regular and indefinitely extensible
one in the case of compounded words, so that any compound with nounflnal may be turned without alteration into an adjective, while to a simple
noun must be added an adjective-making suffix in order to adapt it to
adjective use: for example, that while hasta must become hastin and
bāhu must become bāhumont, hiraṇyahasta and mahābāhú change
from noun to adjective value with no [added ending. And second, that
the relation of the qualified noun to the compound should have come to be
so generally that of possession, not of likeness, nor of appurtenance, nor of
any other relation which is as naturally involved in such a construction:
that we may only say, for example, mahābāhuḥ puruṣah man with
great arms, and not also mahābāhur maṇih jewel for a great arm, or
mahābāhavah śākhāḥ branches like great arms.
b. There are, however, in the older language a few derivative adjective compounds which imply the relation of appurtenance rather than that
of possession, and which are with probability to be viewed as survivals of
a state of things 'antecedent to the specialization of the general class as
503 POSSESSIVE COMPOUNDS. [—1297
possessive (compare the similar exceptions under possessive suffixes, 1230g,
1233f). Examples are: viśvā́nara of or for all men, belonging to all
(and so viśvákṛṣṭi, -carṣaṇi, -kṣiti, -gotra, -manus, -āyu, and sar¬
vápaśu, saptámānuṣa), viśváśārada of every autumn, vipathá for
bad roads, dvirājá [battle] of two kings, áśvapṛṣṭha carried on horseback,
vīrápastya abiding with heroes, pūrṇámāsa at full moon, adévaka for
no divinity, bahudevata or -tyà for many divinities, aparisaṁvatsara
not lasting a fall year, ekādaśakapāla for eleven dishes, somendrá for
Soma and Indra. And the compounds with final member in ana mentioned
at 1296 b are probably of the same character. But also in the later language, some of the so-called dvigu-compounds (1312) belong with these:
so dvigu itself, as meaning worth two cows, dvināu bought for two ships;
also occasional cases like devāsura [saṁgrāma] of the gods and demons,
narahaya of man and horse, cakramusala with discus and club, guru¬
talpa violating the teacher's bed.
1295. The possessive compound is distinguished from its substrate, the determinative, generally by a difference of accent. This
difference is not of the same nature in all the divisions of the class;
but oftenest, the possessive has as a compound the natural accent
of its prior member (as in most of the examples given above).
1296. Possessively used dependent compounds, or possessive dependents, are very much less common than
those corresponding to the other division of determinatives.
a* Further examples are: mayū́raroman having the plumes of peacocks, agnitejas having the brightness of fire, jñātímukha wearing the
aspect of relatives, pátikāma desiring a husband, hastipāda having an
elephant's feet, rājanyàbandhu having kshatriyas for relatives.
b. The accent is, as in the examples given, regularly that of the
prior member, and exceptions are rare and of doubtful character. A few
compounds with derivatives in ana have the accent of the final member:
e, g. indrapana serving as drink for Indra, devasádana serving as seat
for the gods, rayisthā́na being source of wealth; but they contain no
implication of possession, and are possibly in character, as in accent, dependent (but compare 1294 b), Also a few in as, as nṛcákṣas men¬
beholding, nṛvā́has men-bearing, kṣetrasā́dhas field-prospering, are probably to be judged in the same way.
1297. Possessively used descriptive compounds, or possessive descriptives, are extremely numerous and of
every variety of character; and some kinds of combination
which are rare in proper descriptive use are very common
as possessives.
a. They will be taken up below in order, according to the char-
1297—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 504
acter of the prior member — whether the noun-final be preceded by
a qualifying adjective, or noun, or adverb.
1298. Possessive compounds in which a noun is preceded by
a qualifying ordinary adjective are (as pointed out above, 1280 f)
very much more common than descriptives of the same form.
a. They regularly and usually have the accent of their prior member:
thus, anyárūpa of other form, ugrábāhu having powerful arms, jīvá¬
putra having living sons, dīrgháśmaśru longbearded, bṛhácchravas of
great renown, bhū́rimūla many-rooted, mahā́vadha bearing a great weapon, viśvárūpa having all forms, śukrávama of bright color, śivā́bhi¬
marśana of propitious touch, satyásaṁdha of true promises, sárvāṅga
whole-limbed, sváyaśas having own glory, háritasraj wearing yellow
garlands.
b. Exceptions, however, in regard to accent are not rare (a seventh
or eighth of the whole number, perhaps). Thus, the accent is sometimes
that of the final member; especially with derivatives in as, as tuvirā́dhas,
purupéśas, pṛthupákṣas, and others in which (as above, 1296b) a
determinative character may be suspected: thus, urujráyas beside urujri,
uruvyácas beside uruvyác, and so on; but also with those of other
final, as ṛjuhásta, śitikákṣa etc., kṛṣṇakáma, citradṛ́śīka, tuvi¬
śúṣma, ṛjukrátu, pṛthupárśu, puruvártman, raghuyā́man, vīḍu¬
pátman. In a very few cases, the accent is retracted ftom the final to
the first syllable of the second member : thus, aṃhubhéda, tuvigrī́va,
puruvī́ra, pururū́pa, śitibā́hu (also śitibāhú). The largest class is
that of compounds which take the accent upon their final syllable (in part,
of course, not distinguishable from those which retain the accent of the
final member): for example, bahvanná, nīlanakhá, puruputrá,
viśvāṅgá, svapatí, tuvipratí, pṛśniparnī́ f., darśataśrī́, pūtirajjú,
asitajñú, pṛthugmán, bahuprajás.
c. The adjective víśva all, as prior member of a compound (and
also in derivation), changes its accent regularly to viśvá; sárva whole, all
does the same in a few cases.
1299. Possessive compounds with a participle preceding and
qualifying the final noun-member are numerous, although such a
compound with simple descriptive value is almost unknown. The
accent is, with few exceptions, that of the prior member.
a. The participle is oftenest the passive one, in ta or na. Thus,
chinnápakṣa with severed wing, dhṛtárāṣṭra of /irmly held royalty,
hatàmātṛ whose mother is slain, iddhā́gni whose fire is kindled, uttāná¬
hasta with outstretched hand, práyatadaksiṇa having presented sacrificial
gifts; and, with prefixed negative, áriṣṭavīra whose men are unharmed,
átaptatanu of unbumed substance, ánabhimlātavarṇa of untarnished
color. Exceptions in regard to accent are very few: there have been noticed
only paryastākṣá, vyastakeśī́ f., achinnaparṇá.
505 POSSESSIVE COMPOUNDS. [—1300
b. Examples occur of a present participle in the same situation. In
about half the (accentuated) instances, it gives its own accent to the compound: thus, dyutádyāman, dhṛṣádvarṇa etc, śucádratha, rúśad¬
vatsa etc, bhrā́jajjanman etc, saṁyádvīra, stanáyadama, sā́dhad¬
iṣṭi; in the others, the accent is drawn forward to the final syllable of
the participle (asin the compounds with governing participle: below, 1309) :
thus, dravátpāṇi etc (dravát also occurs as adverb), rapśádūdhai),
svanádratha, arcáddhūma, bhandádiṣṭi, krandádiṣṭi. With these last
agrees in form jarádaṣṭi attaining old age, long-lived; but its make-up,
in view of its meaning, is anomalous.
c. The RV. has two compounds with the perfect middle participle as
prior member: thus, yuyujānásapti with harnessed coursers (perhaps rather
having harnessed their coursers), and dadṛśānápavi (with regular accent,
instead of dádṛśāna, as elsewhere irregularly in this participle) with conspicuous wheel-rims.
d. Of a nearly participial character is the prior element in śrútkarṇa
(RV.) of listening ear; and with this are perhaps accordant dī́dyagni and
sthā́raśman (RV., each once).
1300. Possessive compounds having a numeral as prior member
are very common, and for the most part follow the same rule of
accent which isfollowed by compounds with other adjectives: excepted are those beginning with dvi and tri, which accent in general
the final member.
a. Examples with other numerals than dvi and tri are: ékacakra,
ékaśīrṣon, ékapad, cáturaṅga, cátuṣpakṣa, páñcāṅguri, páñcāu¬
dana, ṣáḍaśva, ṣàṭpad, saptájihva, saptámātṛ, aṣṭā́pad, aṣṭáputra,
návapad, návadvāra, dáśaśākha, dáśaśīrṣan, dvā́daśāra, triṃśád¬
ara, śatáparvan, śatádant, sahásraṇāman, sahásramūla.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are but few, and have the tone on
the final syllable, whatever may be that belonging originally to the final
member; they are mostly stems in final a, used by substitution for others
in an, i, or a consonant: thus, caturakṣá etc (akṣán or ákṣi: 431),
ṣaḍahá etc. (áhan or áhar: 430 a), daśavṛṣá etc (vṛ́ṣan), ekarātrá
etc. (rā́tri or rā́trī), ekarcá etc. (ṛ́c); but also a few others, as ṣaḍ¬
yogá, aṣṭāyogá, śatārghá, sahasrārghá, ekapará (?).
c. The compounds with dvi and tri for the most part have the accent of their final member: thus, for example, dvijánman, dvidhā́ra,
dvibándhu, dvivartaní, dvipád; tritántu, trinā́bhi, triśóka, trivá¬
rūtha, tricakrá, triśīrṣán, tripád. A number of words, however, follow
the general analogy, and accent the numeral: thus, for example, dvípakṣa,
dvíśavas, dvyàsya, tríṣandhi, tryàra, tryā̀śir, and sometimes dví¬
pad and trípad in AV. As in the other numeral compounds, a substituted stem in a is apt to take the accent on the final: thus, dvivṛṣá
and trivṛṣá, dvirājá, dvirātrá, tryāyuṣá, tridivá; and a few of other
1300—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 506
character with tri follow the same rule: thus, trikaśá, trinākà, tri¬
bandhú, tryudhán, tribarhís, etc.
d. The neuter, or also the feminine, of numeral compounds is often
used substantively, with a collective or abstract value, and the accent is
then regularly on the final syllable: see below, 1312.
1301. Possessive compounds having as prior member a noun
which has a quasi-adjective value in qualifying the final member are
very frequent, and show certain specialities of usage.
a. Least peculiar is a noun of material as prior member (hardly to be
reckoned as possessive dependents, because the relation of material is not
regularly expressed by a case: 295): thus, híraṇyahasta gold-handed,
híraṇyasraj with golden garlands, ayaḥsthūṇa having brazen supports,
rajatánābhi of silver navel.
1302. Especially common is the use of a noun as prior member
to qualify the other appositionally, or by way of equivalence (the
occasional occurrence of determinatives of this character has been noticed above, 1280 d). These may conveniently be called appo¬
sitional possessives. Their accent is that of the prior member,
like the ordinary possessive descriptives.
a. Examples are: áśvaparṇa horse-winged, or having horses as wings
(said of a chariot), bhū́migṛha having the earth as house, indrasakhi
having Indra for friend, agníhotṛ́ having Agni as priest, gandharvápatnī
having a Gandharva for spouse, śūráputra having hero-sons, jarā́mṛtyu
having old age as mode of death, living till old age, agnívāsas fire-clad,
tadanta ending with that, cāracakṣus using spies for eyes, viṣṇuśar¬
manāman named Vishnuśarman; and, with pronoun instead of noun,
tvā́dūta having thee as messenger, tádapas having this for work. Exceptions in regard to accent occur here, as in the more regular descriptive
formation: thus, agnijihvá, vṛṣaṇaśvá, dhūmaśikhá, pavīnasá, asāu¬
nā́ma, tatkúla, etc.
b. Not infrequently, a substantively used adjective is the final member
in such a compound: thus, índrajyeṣṭha having Indra as chief, mánaḥ¬
ṣaṣṭha having the mind as sixth, sómaśreṣṭha of which soma is best,
ekapar á of which the ace is highest (?), ásthibhūya s having bone as the
larger part, chiefly of bone, abhirūpabhūyiṣṭh a chiefly composed of worthy
persons, daśāvar a having ten as the lowest number, cintāpar a having
meditation as highest object or occupation, devoted to meditation, niḥśvāsa¬
parama much addicted to sighing.
c. Certain words are of especialfrequency in the compounds here described, and have in part won a peculiar application. Thus:
d. With ādi beginning or ādika or ādya first are made compounds
signifying the person or thing specified along with others, such a person or
thing et cetera. For example, devā indrādayaḥ the gods having Indra as
first, i. e. the gods Indra etc., marīcyādīn munīn Marīci and the other
507 POSSESSIVE COMPOUNDS. [—1303
sages, svāyambhuvādyāḥ saptāi 'te manavaḥ those seven Marius,
Svāyambhuva etc., agniṣṭomādikān the sacrifices Agnishtoma and so on.
Or the qualified noun is omitted, as in annapānendhanādīni food, drink,
fuel, etc., dānadharmādikaṁ caratu bhavān let your honor practise
liberality, religious rites, and the like. The particles evam and iti are also
sometimes used by substitution as prior members: thus, evamādi vaca¬
nam words to this and the like effect; ato 'ham bravīmi kartavyah
saṁcayo nityam ityādi hence I say "accumulation is ever to be made" etc.
e. Used in much the same way, but less often, is prabhṛti beginning: thus, viśvāvasuprabhṛtibhir gandharvāiḥ with the Gandharvas
Viśvāvasu etc.; especially adverbially, in measurements of space and time,
as tatprabhṛti or tataḥprabhṛti thenceforward.
f. Words meaning foregoer, predecessor, and the like — namely,
pūrva, pūrvaka, puraḥsara, puraskṛta, purogama — are often
employed in a similar manner, and especially adverbially, but for the most
part to denote accompaniment, rather than antecedence, of that which is
designated by the prior member of the compound: e. g. smitapūrvam
with a smile, anāmayapraśnapūrvakam with inquiries after health,
pitāmahapurogama accompanied by the Great Father.
g. The noun mātrā measure stands as final of a compound which is
used adjectively or in the substantive neuter to signify a limit that is not
exceeded, and obtains thus the virtual value of mere, only: thus, jala¬
mātreṇa vartayan living by water only (lit. by that which has water
for its measure or limit), garbhacyutimātreṇa by merely issuing from
the womb, prāṇayātrikamātrah syāt let him be one possessing what does
not exceed the preservation of life; uktamātre tu vacane but the words
being merely uttered.
h. The noun artha object, purpose is used at the end of a compound,
in the adverbial accusative neuter, to signify for the sake of or the like:
thus, yajñasiddhyartham in order to the accomplishment of the sacrifice
(lit. in a manner having the accomplishment of the sacrifice as its object),
damayantyartham for DamayantVs sake (with Damayantl as object).
i. Other examples are ābhā, kalpa, in the sense of like, approaching:
thus, hemābha gold-like, mṛtakalpa nearly dead, pratipannakalpa almost
accomplished; — vidhā, in the sense of kind, sort: thus, tvadvidha of
thy sort, púruṣavidha of human kind; — prāya, in the sense of mostly,
often, and the like: thus, duḥkhaprāya full of pain, tṛṇaprāya abounding in grass, nirgamanaprāya often going out; — antara (in substantive
neuter), in the sense of other: thus, decantara another region (lit. that
which has a difference ofregion), janmāntarāṇi other existences, śākhāntare
in another text.
1303. In appositional possessive compounds, the second member, if it
designates a part of the body, sometimeslogically signifies that part to which
what is designated by the prior member belongs, that on or in which it is.
1303—] XVIII . COMPOSITION. 508
a. Thus, ghṛtápṛṣṭha butter-backed, mádhujihva honey-tongued,
niṣkágrīva and maṇigrīva necklace-necked, pā́trohasta vessel-handed,
vájrabāhu lightning-armed, ásṛṅmukha blood-factd, kīlā́lodhan meaduddered, vā́jojaṭhara sacrifice-bellied, vāṣpakaṇṭha with tears in the
throat, śraddhā́manas with faith in the heart; with irregular accent,
dhūmākṣī́ f. smoke-eyed, aśrumukhī́ f. tear-faced; and khā́dihasta
ring-handed (khādí). In the later language, such compounds are not infrequent with words meaning hand: thus, śastrapāṇi having a sword in
the hand, laguḍahasta carrying a staff.
1304. Of possessive compounds having an adverbial element as
prior member, the most numerous by far are those made with the
inseparable prefixes. Their accent is various. Thus:
a. In compounds with the negative prefix a or an (in which the latter
logically negatives the imported idea of possession), the accent is prevailingly
on the final syllable, without regard to the original accent of the final member.
For example: anantá having no end, abalá not possessing strength, arathá
without chariot, aśraddhá faithless, amaṇí without ornament, aśatrú
without a foe, avarmán not cuirassed, adánt toothless, apád footless,
atejás without brightness, anārambhaṇá net to be gotten hold of, apra¬
timāná incomparable, aducchuná bringing no harm, apakṣapucchá
without sides or tail.
b. But a number of examples (few in proportion to those already instanced) have the prefix accented (like the simple descriptives: 1288 a):
thus, ákṣiti indestructible, águ kineles«, ágopā without shepherd, ájīvana
lifeless, ánāpi without friends, áśiśvī f. without young, ámṛtyu deathless, ábrahman without priest, ávyacas without eatension, áhavis without
oblation, and a few others; AV, has áprajas, but ŚB. aprajás. A very
few have the accent on the penult: namely, aśésas, ajam, and avīra
(with retraction, from vīrá), apútra (do., from putrá); and AV. has
abhrā́tṛ, but RV. abhrātṛ́.
c. In compounds with the prefixes of praise and dispraise, su and
dus, the accent is in the great majority of cases that of the final member:
thus, sukálpa of easy make, subhága well portioned, sunákṣatra of
propitious star, suputrá having excellent sons, sugopā́ well-shepherded,
sukīrtí of good fame, sugándhi fragrant, subāhú well-armed, suyáṁtu
of easy control, sukrátu of good capacity, suhā́rd good-hearted, susráj
well-garlanded, suvárman well-cuirassed, suvā́sas well-clad, supráṇīti
well guiding; durbhaga ill-portioned, durdṛ́śīka of evil aspect, durdhára
hard to restrain, durgándhi ill-savored, durādhī́ of evil designs, dur¬
dhártu hard to restrain, duṣṭárītuhard to excel, duratyétu hard to cross,
durdhúr ill-yoked, dumā́man ill-named, durvā́sas ill-clad.
d. There are, however, a not inconsiderable number of instances in
which the accent of these compounds is upon the final syllable: thus,
suśiprá well-lipped, svapatyá of good progeny, susaṁkāśá of good aspect,
svaṅgurí well-fingered, sviṣú having good arrows, supīvás well fatted;
509 POSSESSIVE COMPOUNDS. [—1305
and compounds with derivatives in ana, assuvijñāná of easy discernment,
sūpasarpaṇá of easy approach, duścyavaná hard to shake; and A V. has
suphalá and subandhú against RV. suphála and subándhu. Like
avī́ra, suvī́ra shows retraction of accent. Only dúrāśir has the tone on
the prefix.
e. On the whole, the distinction by accent of possessive from determinative is less clearly shown in the words made with su and dus than
in any other body of compounds.
f. The associative prefix sa or (less often) sahá is treated like an
adjective element, and itself takes the accent in a possessive compound:
thus, sákratu of joint will, sánāman of like name, sàrūpa of similar
form, sáyoni having a common origin, sávācas of assenting words, sátoka
having progeny along, with one's progeny, sábrāhmaṇa together with the
Brahmans, sámūla wiíh the root, santardeśa with the intermediate directions;
sahágopa with the shepherd, sahávatsa accompanied by one's young, sahá¬
patnī having her husband with her, sahápūruṣa along with our men.
g. In RV. (save in a doubtful case or two), only saha in such compounds gives the meaning of having with one, accompanied by; and, since
saha governs the instrumental, the words beginning with it might be of the
prepositional class (below, 1310). But in A V. both sa and saha have this
value (as illustrated by examples given above); and in the later language,
the combinations with sa are much the more numerous.
h. There are a few exceptions, in which the accent isthat of the final
member: thus, sojóṣa, sajóṣas, sadṛ́śa, sapráthas, sabā́dhas,samanyú
and AV. shows the accent on the final syllable in sāṅgá (ŚB. sā́ṅga) and
the substantivized (1312) savidyutá.
i. Possessive compounds with the exclamatory prefixes ka etc. are
too few in the older language to furnish ground for any rule as to accent:
kábandha is perhaps an example of such.
1305. Possessive compounds in which a verbal prefix is used
as prior member with adjective value, qualifying a noun asfinal
member, are found even in the oldest language, and are rather more
common later (compare the descriptive compounds, above, 1289; and
the prepositional, below, 1310). They usually have the accent of
the prefix.
a. Most common are those made with pra, vi, and sam: thus, for
example, prámahas having exceeding might, práśravas widely famed;
vígrīva of wry neclc, vyàṅga having limbs away or gone, limbless, víjāni
wifeless, viparva and víparus jointless, vyadhvan of wide ways, vimanas
both of wide mind and mindless, vívācas of discordant speech; sámpatnī
having one's husband along, sámmanas of accordant mind, sáṁsahasra
accompanied by a thousand, sámokas of joint abode. Examples of others
are : átyūrmi surging over, àdhivastra having a garment on, ádhyardha
with a half over, ádhyakṣa overseer, ápodaka without water, abhírūpa
1305—] XVII I COMPOSITION 510
of adapted character, ávatoka that has aborted,ā́manasof favorable mind,údojas of exalted power, nímanyu of assuaged fury, nírmāya free from
guile, nirhasta handless.
b. In a comparatively small number of cases, the accent is otherwise,
and generally on the final thus, avakeśá, upamanyú, viśaphá, viśikhá
(AV. víśikha), vikarṇá, sammātṛ́, etc. 5 111 an instance or two, that of
the final member thus, samśíśvarī having a common young
1306. Possessive compounds with an ordinary adverb as prior
member are also found in every period of the language They usually have the accent which belongs to the adverb asindependent word.
a. Examples are ántyūti bringing near help, avódeva calling down
the gods, ìtáūti helping on this side, ihacitta with mind directed hither,
dakṣiṇatáskaporda wearing the braid on the right side, nā́nādharman
of various character, purudhápratīka of manifold aspect, viśvátomukha
with faces on all sides, sadyáūti of immediate aid, víṣurūpa of various
form, smádūdhan with udder, adhástāllakṣman with mark below, eka¬
tomukha with face on one side, táthavidha of such sort
b. An instance or two of irregular accent are met with thus, puro¬
rathá whose chariot is foremost, evaṁkratú so-minded.
1307. a. It was pointed outin the preceding chapter (1222 h)
that the indifferent suffix ka is often added to a pure possessive
compound, to help the conversion of the compounded stem into an
adjective, especially, where the final of the stem is less usual or
manageable in adjective inflection
b. Also, the compound possessive stem occasionally takes further a pos¬
sessive-making suffix thus, yaśobhagín, suśiprm, varavarṇin, dīrgha¬
sūtrin, puṇyavāgbuddhikarmm, sutásomavant, tādṛgrūpavant,
trayodaśadvīpavant, nārakapālakuṇḍalavant, amṛtabuddhimant.
c. The frequent changes which aTe undergone by the final of a stem
occurring at the end of a compound are noticed further on (1315).
1308. The possessive compounds are not always used in the
later language with the simple value of qualifying adjective, often
they have a pregnant sense, and become the equivalents of dependent clauses, or the having which is implied in them obtains virtually the value of our having as sign of past time
a. Thus, for example, prāptayāuvana possessing attained adolescence,
1. e. having arrived at adolescence, anadhigataśāstra with unHudied books,
1. e. who has neglected study, kṛtaprayatna possessing performed effort,
i. e. on whom e^ort is expended, aṅgulīyakadarśanāvasāna having the
sight of the ring astermination, I. e destined to end on sight of the ring,
uddhṛtaviṣādaśalyaḥ having an extracted despair-arrow, 1. e. when I shall
have extracted the barb of despair, śrutavistāraḥ kriyatām let him be
made with heard details, 1. e. let him be informed of the details ‚ dṛṣṭavīryo
me rāmaḥ Rama has seen my prowess, bhagnabhāṇḍo dvijo yathā like
511 PARTICIPIA L A N D PREPOSITIONA L COMPOUNDS . [—1310
the Brahman that broke the pots, ukhānṛtam ṛṣiṁ yathā like a sage that
has spoken falsely.
B. Compounds with Governed Final Member.
1309. Participial Compounds. This group of compounds,
in which the prior member is a present participle and thefinalmember its object, is a small one (toward thirty examples), and exclusively Vedic — indeed, almost limited to the oldest Vedic (of the
Rig-Veda). The accent is on the final syllable of the participle,
whatever may have been the latter's accent as an independent word.
a. Examples are: vidádvasu winning good things, kṣayádvīra
governing (kṣáyant) heroes, taráddveṣas overcoming (tárant) foes, ābha¬
rádvasu bringing.good things, codayánmati inciting (codáyant) devotion,
mandayátsakha rejoicing friends, dhārayátkavi sustaining sages, maṃ¬
hayádrayi bestowing wealth.
b. In sādádyoni sitting in the lap (sādat quite anomalously for sīdat
or sadat), and spṛhayádvarṇa emulous of color, the case-relation of the
final member is other than accusative. In patayán mandayátsakham
(RV. i. 4. 7), patayát, with accent changed accordingly, represents patay¬
átsakham, the final member being understood from the following word.
Vidádaśva is to be inferred from its derivative vāídadaśvi. Of this
formation appear to be jamádagni, pratádvasu (prathádP), and tras¬
ádasyu (for trasáddasyu P), It was noticed above (1299 c) that yuyujā¬
násapti is capable of being understood as,a unique compound of like
character, with a perfect instead of present participle; sā́dhadiṣṭi, on
account of its accent, is probably possessive.
1310. Prepositional Compounds. By this name may be
conveniently called those combinations in which the prior member
is a particle having true prepositional value, and the final member
is a noun governed by it. Such combinations, though few in number as compared with other classes of compounds, are not rare, either
in the earlier language or in the later. Their accent is so various that
no rule can be set up respecting it.
a. Examples are*: átyavj,, passing through thewool, atirātrá overnight, atimātrá exceeding measugavá belonging to the cow; adhaspadá under the feet, adhookṣá below
the axle; ánupatha following the road, anupūrvá following the one preceding, one after another, anuṣatyá in accordance with truth, anukū́la
down stream, etc ; ántaspatha (with anomalously changed accent of antár),
within the way, antordāvá within the flame (?), antarhastá in the hand;
ántigṛha near the house; apiprā́ṇa accompanying the breath (prāṇá), ápi¬
vrata concerned with the ceremony, apiśarvará bordering on night, apikamá
next the ear; abhijñú reaching to the knee, abhívīr a and abhisatvan overcoming heroes; ā́pathi on the road, ā́deva going to the gods, ājarasá
1310—] XVIII. COMPOSITION. 512
reaching old age, ādvādaśá up to twelve; upakakṣá reaching to the armpits, upottamá next to last, penultimate; upáribudhna above the bottom,
upárimartya rising above mortals; tirojaná beyond people; niḥsālá out
of the house; paripád (about the feet) snare, parihastá about the hand,
bracelet; parókṣa out of sight, parómātra beyond measure, parogavyūtí
beyond the fields, paraḥsahasrá (páraḥsahasra, ŚB.) above a thousand ;
purokṣá in front of the eyes; pratidosá toward evening, pratilomá
against the grain, pratikū́la up stream, pratyákṣa before the eyes; bahiḥ¬
paridhí outside the enclosure; vipathi outside the road; samakṣá close
to the eyes, in sight.
b. Compounds of this character are in the later language especially
common with adhi: thus, adhyātma relating to the soul or self, adhi¬
yajña relating to the sacrifice, etc.
c. A suffixal a is sometimes added to a final consonant, as in upānasá
on the wagon, āvyuṣá until daybreak. In a few instances, the suffix ya
is taken (see above, 1212m); and in one word the suffix in: thus, pari¬
panthin besetting the path.
d. The prepositional compounds are especially liable to adverbial use:
see below, 1313 b.
Adjective Compounds as Nouns and as Adverbs.
1311. Compound adjectives, like simple ones, are freely used
substantively as abstracts and collectives, especially in the neuter,
less often in the feminine; and they are also much used adverbially,
especially in the accusative neuter.
a. The matter is entitled to special notice only because certain forms
of combination have become of special frequency in these uses, and because
the Hindu grammarians have made out of them distinct classes of compounds, with separate names. There is nothing in the olderlanguage which
by its own merits would call for particular remark under this head.
1312. The substantively used compounds having a numeral as
prior member, along with, in part, the adjective compounds themselves, are treated by the Hindus as a separate class, called dvigu.
a. The name is a sample of the class, and means of two cows, said
to be used in the sense of worth two cows; as also pañcagu bought for
five cows, dvināu worth two ships, páñcakapāla made in five cups, and
so on.
b. Vedic examples of numeral abstracts and collectives are: dvirājá
[combat] of two kings, triyugá three ages, triyojaná space of three leagues,tridivá the triple heaven, pañcayojaná space of five leagues, ṣaḍahá sic
days' time, daśāṅgulá ten fingers' breadth; and, with suffix ya, sahasrāhṇyá
thousand days' journey. Others, not numeral, but essentially of the same
character, are, for example: anamitrá freedom from enemies, nikilbiṣá
freedom from guilt, savidyutá thunderstorm, víhṛdaya heartlessness, and
513 ADJECTIV E COMPOUNDS AS NOUN S A N D ADVERBS . [—131 3
sáhṛdaya heartiness, sudivá prosperity by day, sumṛgá and suśakuná
prosperity with beasts and birds. Feminines of like use are not quotable
from RV. or AV. ; later occur such as triśatī three hundred (481) , trilokī
the three worlds, pañcamūlī aggregate of five roots.
c. As the examples show, the accent of words thus used is various;
but it is more prevailingly on the final syllable than in the adjective compounds in their ordinary use.
1313 . Those adverbially used accusatives of secondary adjective compounds which have an indeclinable or particle as prior member are reckoned by the Hindu grammarians as a separate class of
compounds, and called by the name avyayībhāva.
a. This term is a derivative from the compound verb (1094 ) made up
of avyaya uninflected and √bhū‚ and means conversion to an indeclinable.
b. The prepositional compounds (1310 ) are especially frequent in this
use: thus, for example, anuṣvadhám by one's own will, abhipūrvám
and parovarám in succession, ādvādaśám up to twelve, pratidoṣám at
evening, samakṣám in sight. Instances given by the grammarians are:
adhihari upon Hari, uparājam with the king, upanadam or upanadi
near the river, pratyagni toward the fire, pratiniśam every night, nir¬
makṣikam with freedom from flies.
c. A large and important class is made up of words having a relative
adverb, especially yathā, as prior member. Thus, for example, yathāvaśám
as one chooses (váśa will), yathākṛtám as done ^before], according to
usage, yathānāmá by name, yathābhāgám according to several portion,
yathāṅgám and yathāparú limb by limb, yatrakā́mam whither one will,
yāvanmātrám in some measure, yāvajjīvám as long as one lives, yāvat¬
sábandhu according to the number of relations.
d. These compounds are not common in the old language; RV. has
with yathā only four of them, AV. only ten; and no such compound is
used adjectively except yācchreṣṭha RV., yāvacchreṣṭhá A V. as good as
possible. ŚB. has yathākārín, yathācārín, yáthākāma, yáthākratu as
adjectives (followed in each case by a correlative táthā). The adjective use
in the later language also is quite rare as compared with the adverbial.
e. Other casesthan the accusative occasionally occur: thus, instrumental,
as yathāsaṁkhyena, yathāśaktyā, yathepsayā, yathāpratiguṇāis;
and ablative, as yathāucityāt.
f. A class of adverbs of frequent occurrence is made with sa: e. g.
sakopam angrily, sādaram respectfully, sasmitam with a smile, savi¬
śeṣam especially.
g. Other adverbial compounds of equivalent character occur earlier, and
are common later: for example, ṛtekarmám without work, nānārathám
on different chariots, ubhayadyús two days in succession, citrapadakra¬
mam with wonderful progress, pradānapūrvam with accompaniment of
a gift; etc.
1314—] XVTII . COMPOSITION. 514
Anomalous Compounds.
1314. As in every language, compounds are now and then met
with which are of anomalous character, as exhibiting combinations
of elements not usually puttogether, or not after such a method, or
for such a purpose. Some ofthese, especially ofthose occurring in
the old language, may well be noticed here.
a. Compounds having a particle as final member: as, aprati having
no equal, tuviprati mightily opposing, átathā refusing, vitatha false,
yathātathá as it really is, susoha prosperity in companionship, aniha and
anamutra having no here and no yonder, etc.
b. Agglomerations of two or more elements out of phrases: thus, aham¬
pūrvá eager to be first, ahamuttará contest for preeminence, mamasatyá
contest for possession, itihāsá legend (iti hā "sa thus, indeed, it was),
naghamārá and noghāriṣá not, surely, dying or coming to harm, kuvitsa
some unknown person, tadidartha having just that as aim, kūcidarthín
having errands in every direction, kācitkará doing all sorts of things, ku¬
hacidvid wherever found, akutaścidbhaya out of all danger, yadbhaviṣya
What-is-to-be, etc.
c. Agglomerations in which the prior member retains a syntactic form:
as, anyonya and paraspara one another, avaraspara inverted.
d. Aggregations with the natural order inverted: e. g. pitāmahá and
tatāmahá grandfather, putrahata with his sonsslain, jānvākná and
-jānvakta with bended knee, dantajāta provided with teeth, somāpahṛtá
deprived of soma, paṅktírādhas having groups of gifts, gojara old bull,
agrajihvá, agranāsikā, etc. tip of the tongue, of the nose, etc. Compare
also 1291c.
e. Aggregations of particles were pointed out above (1111a); also
(1122e) cases in which ná and mā́ are used in composition.
f. In late Sanskrit (perhaps after the false analogy of combinations
like tad anu, viewed as tadanu, with tad as stem instead of neuter accusative), a preposition is sometimes compounded as final member with the
noun governed by it: e. g. vṛkṣādhas or vṛkṣādhastāt under the tree,
dantāntaḥ between the teeth, bhavanopari on top of the house, satyavinā
without truth.
Stem-finals altered in Composition.
1315. Transfers to an a-form of declension from other less
commonfinals,which are not rare in independent use, are especially
common in the final members of compounds. Thus:
a. A stem in an often drops its final consonant (compare 429 a,
437): examples are akṣa, adhva, arva, astha, aha, taksa, brahma,
mūrdha, rāja, loma, vṛṣa, śva, saktha, sāma.
5 1 5 LOOSE CONSTRUCTION WIT H COMPOUNDS. [—1316
b. An i or ī is changed to a: examples are aṅgula, añjala, aśra,
kukṣa, khāra, nada, nābha, bhūma, rātra, sakha.
C An a is added after a final consonant, and sometimes after an
u-vowel or a diphthong (compare 399): examples are ṛca, tvaca; uda,
pada, śarada; apa; dhura, pura; ahna, aśmana, ūdhna, rājña;
anasa, ayasa, āyuṣa, urasa, enasa, tamasa,manasa, yajusa, rajasa,
rahasa, varcasa, vedasa, śreyasa, sarasa; bhruva, diva, gava,
gāva, nāva.
d. More sporadic and anomalous cases are such as: apanna-da (-dant),
pañca-ṣa (-ṣaṣ), ajāika-pa (-pad), śata-bhiṣā (-bhiṣaj), vipaś-ci
(-cit), yathā-pura (-puras).
Loose Construction with Compounds.
1316. In the looseness of unlimited and fortuitous combination,
especially in the later language, it is by no means rare that a word
in composition has an independent word in the sentence depending
upon or qualifying it alone, rather than the compound of which it
forms a part.
a. Examples are: rāyáskāmo viśvápsnyasya (RV.) desirous of
all-enjoyable wealth; aṃhór urucákriḥ (RV.) causing relief from distress;
mahādhané árbhe (RV.) in great contest and in small; svānāṁ śrāiṣ¬
ṭhyakāmaḥ. (ACS.) desiring superiority over his fellows; brāhmaṇāñ
chrutaśīlavṛttasampannān ekena vā (AGS.) Brahmans endowed with
learning, character, and behavior, or with one [of the three]; cittapramāthinī
bālā devānām api (MBh.) a girl disturbing the minds even of the gods ;
vasiṣṭhavacanād ṛṣyaśṛṅgasya co 'bhayoḥ (R.) at the words of both
Vasishtha and Rishyaśringa, sītādravyāpaharaṇe śastrāṇām āuṣa¬
dhasya ca (M.) in case of stealing ploughing implements or weapons or medicament; jyotiṣām madhyacārī (H.) moving in the midst of the stars; dāru¬
pātraṁ ca mṛnmayam (M.) a wooden and an earthen vessel;syandane
dattadṛṣṭiḥ (Ś.) with eye fixed on the chariot; tasminn ullambitamṛtaḥ
(KSS.) dead and hanging upon it.
33*
APPENDIX .
A. The following text is given (as proposed above, 3) in [order
to illustrate by an example the variety of Sanskrit type in use. It
is given twice over, and a transliteration into European letters follows. The textis a fable extracted from the first book of the Hito¬
padeśa.
The Hunter, Deer, Boar, and Jackal.
—\ ‚ - ____ _ ___ _ - v ^
1-7 V:m «mnil^ I l-TiTTcTq -T"5jTT īR MHl*flff:
^cft-uiimHrfi iRywmtFT^- r ~ r *r ~–f r 3-*- ^
^rrf»—~ í ~ f w ī ī i i m : i
-iMI-rīX«9^<l'-ít ^TU-Í ~pfit "Tft^+i^iśKivílfīī~-
>TF-ni i 'T^t5-T ^nfaiH^i i ~—-TT I
-rren wT-ff^TTfx ^--rfii Ttwrf ^ fw~i «fl ^ lA+fl^M ^TTg-p-i ^nr–
^t4ì^wi -f-n-ÄTt"; i "í7iftīfw ^r—ś--j?qfīn^ ~ n if^
†*rśr: -c ^-Kt-n -"f"f i-f– i-"íf ^-ftf»r i
-RĪ--: ^N-ft f*i-í -"í"ft -rrfīi-i-t-i– i
"n(n*i-i<4<C*^-I "st-rarr -nj'*† Ii
APPENDIX . 517
Htq^r : H
5 ™^"— Í fö-^rc-ffa^ -TOT: IC(^?H*J- T
d'cHHfU f-f-T W ^TT-ft CRPÍ fīī^: I
īr^P^ ; ^T-^T-T T T R īFp? : qr^-^T^TTTSff Hl-^d l
^Tr-īīT^r^^TW-īī ^ -HlśHÌ*Wlf^-clM<tíT l īT^ T -ÍWT»II
HT^feṛr-m WI-STH «Ujift from chUiwid«iīm«i ^rgsr o wdi4Wfrcq i
HRichild I ddfttoì ^T—W gd^rMĪdrÌH *ig*T ftra: * jtóilCi: tl"r á
ĪTH: i wft JE wcJif+H i
^7Tfra^ w ^gur –xiMchl irr: II
āsīt kalyāṇakaṭakavāstavyo bhāiravo nāma vyādhaḥ. sa
cāi 'kadā māṃsalubdhaḥ san dhanur ādāya vindhyāṭavīmadhyaṁ
gataḥ. tatra tena mṛga eko vyāpāditaḥ. mṛgam ādāya gachatā
tena ghorākṛtiḥ sūkaro dṛṣṭaḥ. tatas tena mṛgana bhūmāu ni–
dhāya sūkaraḥ śarena hataḥ. sūkareṇā 'py āgatya pralayagha¬
naghoragarjanaṁ kṛtvā sa vyādho muṣkadeśe hataś chinnadruma
iva papāta. yataḥ:
jalam agniṁ viṣaṁ śastraṁ kṣudvyādhī patanaṁ gireḥ,
nimittaṁ kiṁcid āsādya dehī prāṇāir vimucyate.
518 APPENDIX .
atrāntare dīrgharāvo nāma jambukah paribhramann āhār¬
ārthī tān mṛtān mṛgavyādhasūkarān apaśyat. ālokyā 'cintayad
asāu: aho bhāgyam. mahad bhojyaṁ samupasthitam. athavā:
acintitāni duḥkhāni yathāi 'vā "yānti dehinām,
sukhāny api tathā manye dāívam atrā 'tiricyate.
bhavatu; eṣam māṃsāir masatrayaṁ samadhikam bhojanam
me bhaviṣyati. tataḥ prathamabubhukṣāyāṁ tāvad imāni svā¬
dūni māṃsāni vihāya kodaṇḍāṭanīlagnaṁ snāyubandhaṁ khādāmī
'ty uktvā tathā 'karot. tataś chinne snāyubandhe drutam utpa¬
titena dhanuṣā hṛdi bhinnaḥ sa dīrgharāvaḥ pañcatvaṁ gataḥ.
ato 'ham bravīmi:
kartavyah saṁcayo nityaṁ kartavyo nā 'tisaṁcayaḥ;
atisaṁcayadoṣeṇa dhanuṣā jambuko hataḥ.
B. The following text is given in order to illustrate by a sufficient example the usual method of marking accent, as described
above (87). In the manuscripts, the accent-signs are almost invariably
added in red ink. The text is a hymn extracted from the tenth or
last book of the Rig-Veda; it is regarded by the tradition as uttered
by Vāc voice (i. e. the Word or Logos).
Hymn (X. 125) from the Rig-Veda.
^ "Ś^4yÍH^^I^y-6HIÍ<rt| f-TO^: I
3^T ^iīfīī ?^īī ^&W-lcì Hyicy^ 7jéTFiīCr II II
rfT rfī%T sd^g: "“ HÌ^VülNÌ HUNklÙtíÌH," x} «
APPENDIX . 519
SHUT ^+UĪÌHj4 WlMßj4ì ~T II k H
cTcTT f% ícTW H~TFT f-TWlīīTīī ^TT 3WīīT-T FWfìīī II b II
5ffcT ~ 4l^yi^HHIUII H^-|lí-| f M ī I
^ īī % T ~T ~ ~ MJ^otìHl4rÌÌ īīf^"f íf II r n
aháṁ rudrébhir vásubhiś carāmy ahám ādityāír utá viśvá¬
devāiḥ, ahám mitrā́váruṇo 'bhā́bibharmy ahám indrāgnī́ahám
aśvíno 'bhā́. 1.
aháṁ sómam āhanásam bibharmy aháṁ tváṣṭāram utá pūsáṇam
bhágam, aháṁ dadhāmi dráviṇaṁ (havíṣmate suprāvyê yájamānāya sunvaté. 2.
aháṁ rā́ṣṭrī saṁgámanī vásūnāṁ cikitúṣī prathamā́ yajñíyānām»
tā́m mā devā́ vy àdadhuḥ purutrā́ bhū́risthātrām bhū́ry
āveśáyantīm. 3.
máyā so ánnam atti yó vipáśyati yáḥ prā́ṇiti yá īṁ śṛṇóty uktám,
amantávo mā́ṁ tá úpa kṣiyanti śrudhí śruta śraddhiváṁ te
vadāmi. 4.
ahám evá svayám idáṁ vadāmi júṣṭaṁ devébhir utá mā́nuṣebhih,
yáṁ kāmáye táṁ-tam ugráṁ kṛṇomi tám brahmā́ṇaṁ tám ṛ́ṣiṁ
táṁ sumedhā́m. 5.
aháṁ rudrā́ya dhánur ā́ tanomi brahmadvíṣe śárave hántavā́ u,
aháṁ jánāya samádaṁ kṛṇomy aháṁ dyā́vāpṛthivī́ ā́ viveśa. 6,
aháṁ suve pitáram asya mūrdhán máma yónir apsv àntáḥ sa¬
mudré, táto ví tiṣṭhe bhúvanā́ 'nu víśvo 'tā́ 'mū́ṁ dyā́ṁ varṣmáṇó 'pa spṛśāmi. 7.
ahám evá vā́ta iva prá vāmy arábhamāṇā bhúvanāni víśvā,
paró divā́ pará enā́ pṛthivyāí 'tā́vàtī mahinā́ sám babhūvá. 8.
C. On the next page is given, in systematic arrangement, a
synopsis of all the modes and tenses recognized as normally to be
made from every root in its primary conjugation, for the two common
roots bhū be and kṛ make (only the precative middle and periphrastic future middle are bracketed, as never really occurring).
Added, in each case, are the most important of the verbal nouns and
adjectives, the only ones which it is needful to give as part of every
verb-system.
√bhū be.
Active :
Indie.
Opt.
Impv.
Pple.
Augm.-Pret.
Middle:
Indie.
Opt.
Impv.
Pple.
Augm.-Pret.
√kṛ make.
Active:
Indie.
Opt.
Impv.
Pple.
Augm.-Pret.
Middle:
Indie.
Opt.
Impv.
Pple.
Augm.-Pret
Present-system.
bhávāmi
bháveyam
bhávāni
bhávant
ábhavam
bháve
bháveya
bhávāi
bhávamāna
ábhave
Perfect-system,
babhū́va
babhūvā́ṃs
babhūvé
Aorist-system.
bhuyasam
ábhuvam
[bhaviṣiyá]
babhūvāná
ábhaviṣi
Pass.pple bhūtá; — Infln. bhávitum;
karómi
kuryā́m
karávāṇi
kurvánt
ákaravam
kurve
kurvīyá
karávāi
kurvāṇá
ákurvi
cakara
cakṛvàṃs
cakré
kriyasam
ákarsam
[kṛṣiyá]
cakrāṇá
ákṛṣi
Pass.pple kṛtá; — Infin. kártum;
Future-systems,
bhaviṣyā́mi bhavitā́smi
bhaviṣyánt
ábhaviṣyam
bháviṣyé [bhavitā́he]
bhaviṣyámāṇa
Gerunds bhūtvā́, -bhū́ya.
karisyami kartā́smi
kariṣyánt
ákariṣyam
kariṣyé
kariṣyámāṇa
Gerunds kṛtvā́, -kṛ́tya.
[kartā́he]
SANSKRIT INDEX.
The references in both Indexes are to paragraphs. In this one, many
abbreviations are used; but it is believed that they will be found selfexplaining. For example, "pron." is pronunciation; "euph." points out
anything relating to phonetic form or euphonic combination; "pres.", to
present-system; "int." is intensive; "des." is desiderative; and so on. A
prefixed hyphen denotes a suffix; one appended, a prefix.
a, pron. etc., 19—22; combination
with following vowel, 126, 127;
loss of initial after e and o, 135,
175 a; resulting accent, 135 a; not
liable to guṇa, 235 a; lightened
to i or u, 249; lost in weakened
syllable, 253.
a, as union-vowel in tense-inflection,
621c, 631.
-a, primy, 1148; scdry, 1208, 1209;
-a in -aka, 1181; — a-stems,
dein, 326—34; from rdcl ā-st.,
333, 354; in compsn, 1270, 1287 a.
a- or an-, negative, 1121a—c; in
compsn, 1283ff., 1288a, 1304a, b.
-aka, prmy, 1181; aka-stemssome¬
times govern accus., 271c;scdry,
1222j, k.
-aki, see 1221b.
√akṣ, pf., 788. -
aksara, 8. ^
akṣán, ákṣi, 343/, 431.
agḥoṣa, 34*b.
√ac ôr añc, pf., 788 b; pple, 956 b,
957 c; stems ending with, 407—
10.
-aj, 219 a, 383 k. 5.
√añc, see ac
√añj, euph., 219 a; pres., 694, 687;
pf., 788; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
-aṇḍa, 1201a.
-at, 383k. 3 — and see -ant.
-ata, see 1176e.
-ati, see 1157g.
-atu, see 1161 d.
-atnu, see 1196c.
-atra, see 1185e.
-atha, see 1163c.
-athu, see 1164.
√ad, impf., 621c; caus., 1042g.
-ad, 383 k. 4.
adhi, loss of initial, 1087 a.
adhika, in odd numbers, 477 a, 478 b.
√an, euph., 192b ; pres., 631.
-an, 1160.
an-, see a-.
-ana, 1150; stems in compsn, 1271,
1296 b.
anaḍváh, euph., 224b; dein, 404.
-anā, 1150.
-ani, 1159.
-anī, 1150.
-anīya, 962, 965, 1215 b.
anu, changed to ānu after an-,
1087b.
-anu, see 1162c.
anudātta, 81
anudāttatara, 90 c.
anunāsika, 36 a, 73 a.
anuvrata, with accus., 272.
anuṣṭúbh, euph., 151 d.
anusvāra, pron. etc., 70—3; transliteration, 73 c.
anehás, dein, 419.
-ant or -at, of pples, 584, 1172;
their dein, 443 ff.
522 SANSKRI T INDEX .
-anta, 1209 d.
antaḥsthā, 31, 51a.
antara, in compsn, 1302 i .
-anti, see 1221 c.
anyá, dein, 523.
ap or āp, dein, 151 e, 393.
api, loss of initial, 1087 a.
-abha, 1199.
abhinihita-circumflex, 84 e.
√am, pres., 634; aor., 862.
-am, infin. in, 970 a; gerund, 995.
-amā, see 1166b.
-aye, infin. in, 970 f, 975 b.
-ara, see 1188d.
arí, dein, 343 g.
-aru, see 1192a.
√arth, so-called, 104b, 1056, 1067.
artha, in compsn, 1302 h.
aryamán, dein, 426 a.
árvan, árvant, 455.
√arh, pres., 613; pf., 788; aor.,
862; desid., 1029b.
-ala, see 1189b.
alpaprāna, 37 d.
√av, aor'., 838, 908; pple, 954e;
inf., 968e; ya-ger'd, 992c.
ava, loss of initial, 1087a.
-ava, see 1190a.
avagraha, 16.
√avadhīr, so-called, 104b.
avayáj, avayā́, 406.
avyayībhāva, 1111 d, 1313.
√aś attain, pf., 788; aor., 834b,
837—9, 847; fat., 936c; inf.,
968 d.
√aś eat, pf., 803 a des., 1029 b,
1031; caus., 1042 n.
√as be, pres., 636, 621 e; pf., 800m;
in periphr. conjn, 1070—2, 1073 d;
in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 d;
in empd conjn, 1093, 1094.
√as throw, pres., 761 c; aor., 847;
pple, 956 e; inf., 968 c.
as final, euph. treatment of, 175;
exceptional cases, 176.
-as, 1151; dein ofstems in, 411 ff,;
as-stems in compsn, 1278, 1296 b
1298 b.
-as, infin. in, 970 a, 971.
asán, ásrj, 398, 432.
-asi, 1198.
àsṛj, euph., 219: and see asán.
-ase, infin. in, 970c, 973 a.
asthán, ásthi, 343 i, 431.
-asna, see 1195a.
-asnu, see 1194d.
√ah say, pf., 801a.
√ah connect (?), 788 a.
áhan, áhar, áhas, 430.
ā, pron. etc., 19, 22; combination of
final, 126, 127; elision of initial,
135 d; vṛddhi of a, 236ff,;lightened to ī or i, 250 ; to a, 250 c;
in pres., 661—6, 761 f, g; in aor.,
884; in pple, 954 c; in des.,
1028 d.
ā́, with ablative, 293 c, 983 a.
-ā, 1149.
ā-stems, dein, 347 ff.
-āka, see 1181 d.
-āku, see 1181 d.
-ātu, see 1161 d.
ātman, used reflexively, 514 a.
ātmane padam, 529.
ādi, ādika, ādya, in compsn, 1302d.
-āna, in pples, 584, 1175; used instead of māna, 741 a, 752 e, 1043 f;
-āna in other derivatives, 1175 a.
-ānī, see 1223b.
-ānu, see 1162c.
ānunāsikya, 36 a.
√āp, 1087 f; pf., 783 d; aor., 847,
862; des., 1030.
ābhā, in compsn, 1302 f.
ām, impv. 3d sing, in, 618.
āmreḍita, 1260 d.
-āyanà, 1219.
-āyī, 1220.
-āyya, 966 c, 1051 f, 1218.
-āra, see 1188d, 1226b.
-āru, see 1192a.
-āla, see 1227a, 12451.
-ālu, see 1192b, 1227b.
√ās, pres., 619 c, 628; inf., 968d;
periph. pf., 1071 c; in ppial periph.
phrases, 1075 c.
ā́s, āsán, āsyà, 398b, 432.
ās final, euph. treatment of, 177.
i , pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; i and y,
55; combinations of final, 126,
129, 797f; with preceding a-vowel,
127; from ya, 252, 784c, 769,
922 b, 954b; cases of loss before
y, 233 a.
i, union-vowel, 254, 555b; in pres.,
630, 631, 634, 640; in pf., 796—
8, 803; in aor., 876b, 877; in
flit., 934, 935, 943; in pple, 956;
in infin., 968;in des., 1031.
i-stems, dein, 335ff.; from rdcl īst., 354; in compsn, 1276, 1287c;
sometimes govern accus., 271 f.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 523
√i go, pf., 783 b, 801 d; fut., 935 a;
ya-ger'd, 992 a, c; inf., 1002e,
1021b; caus., 10421; in ppial
periphr. phrases, 994e, 1075a;
periphr. conj., 1071 f; irreg. comb,
with prefixes, 1087 c; in compd
conjn, 1092 b.
√i (in, inv) send, 716 a.
- i , prmy, 1155; scdry, 1221.
-ika, prmy, 1186 c; scdry, 1222j, I.
-ikā,fem. to -aka, 1181c, 1222i.
√ich, 608 b, 753 b.
-ij, 219 a, 383 k. 5.
-it, 383 k. 3; advbl, 1109 a.
-ita, 1176 a, b, d.
iti, uses of, 1102 a—c; peculiar
construction with, 268b; abbrev'd
to ti, 1102d.
-iti, see 1157g.
-itu, see 1161c.
-itnu, see 1196.
-itra, see 1185e.
√idh or indh, euph., 160c; aor.,
836, 837, 840 b.
√in (or inv), 699 b, 709, 716 a,
749 b.
-in, 1183, 1230; in-stems, dein,
438ff.; in compsn, 1275, 1287e;
sometimes govern accus., 271b;
used participially, 960 b.
-ina, see 1177b, 1209c, 1223f.
ínakṣa, 1029 c.
-ineya, see 1216d.
√inv, see in.
-ibha, see 1199a.
-ima, 1224 a.
-iman, see 1168 i—k.
iy in euph. comb'n from an i-vowel,
129 a, c, d, 352 b.
-iya, 1214.
íyakṣa, 1029 c.
íyant, dein, 451.
ir-stems, dein, 392.
ira, see 1188e, 1226b.
irajya, iradha, 1021a.
√il, caus., 1042 b.
-ila, see 1189b, 1227a.
iva, euph., 1102.
-iva, see 1190a.
-ivas, see 1173b.
√iṣ desire, pres., 608b, 753b; inf.,
968d; desid., 1029b.
√iṣ send, caus., 1042b.
-iṣa, see 1197b.
-iṣṭha, 467—70, 1184.
-iṣṇu, 1194.
-is,' 1153; is-stems, dein, 411 ff.
Ī, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; combinations of final, 126, 129, 797f;
with preceding a-vowel, 127; circumflexed, 128; uncombinable in
dual etc., 138; ī as final ofstem
in verbal compsn, 1093, 1094.
ī, union-vowel, 254; in tense-inflection, 555b, c; of pres., 632—
4; of impf., 621, 631—4; of saor., 880b, 888—91; of int.,
1004 ff.; ī for i, 900b, 935a,
968 d, f.
ī-stems, dein, 347 ff.
-ī, 1156; to i before added sfx,
471b, 1203 d, 1237 c, 1239 b; in
compsn, 1249 d,
-īka, see 1186c
√īks, aor., 862; desid., 1029b;
pe'riph. pf., 1071c, 1073 a.
√īḍ, pres., 628, 630; pf., 783d.
īta- for eta-forms in optative, 738 b,
771 d, 1032 a, 1043 c
-īti, see 1157g.
-ītu, see 1161 c.
-īna, prmy, see 1171b; scdry,
1223 d.
-Iman, see 1168j.
īya, conj.-stem, 1021b.
-īya, 1215.
-īyas, 467—70, 1184; stems in,
dein, 463 ff. √īr, pres., 628; pf., 783 d, 801 d;
pple, 957 b.
-īra, see 1188e.
-īva, see 1190a.
√īś, pres., 628, 630.
īśvara, with infin., 984, 987.
√īṣ, euph., 225 a.
-īsá, see 1197.
√īh, euph., 240 b.
u, pron. etc, 19, 20, 22; u and v,
57; combinations of final, 126,
129; with preceding a-vowel, 127;
from va, 252, 784, 769, 922 b,
954b, 956 d; cases of loss before
v, 233 a; final u gunated in scdry
derivation, 1203 a.
u-stems, dein, 335ff.; from rdcl ūst,, 354; desid. u-stems govern
accus., 271a.
-u, 1178; -u in -uka, 1180 a.
-uka, 1180; stemssometimes govern
accus., 271 g.
uksán, dein, 426 b.
√uch, 608 b, 753 b.
√ujh, periphr. pf., 1071c
5 2 4 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√uñch, pres., 758.
nnādi-suf fixes, 1138 a.
-ut, 383 k. 3.
-utra, see 1185e.
-utṛ, see 1182b.
-utha, see 1163d.
√ud or und, pres., 694 a, 758a;
pple, 957 d; desid., 1029 b.
úd, údaka, udán, 398b, 432.
udātta, 81.
-una, see 1177c.
-uni, see 1158e.
upadhmānīya, 69.
√ubj, aor., 862.
√ubh or umbh, pres., 694, 758 a.
-ubha, see 1199a.
ubháya, dein, 525 c.
ur or us as 3d pi. ending, 169 b.
nr-stems, dein, 392.
-ura, see 1188f, 1226b.
-uri, 1191 a.
-ula, see 1189b, 1227a.
uv in euph. comb'n from an u-vowel, 129 a, c, d, 352b, 697a.
nśánas, uśánā, dein, 355 a, 416.
√us, pres., 608b; ya-ger'd, 992b;
periphr. pf., 1071 f.
-uṣa, see 1197c.
uṣàs, euph., 168a; dein, 415 b.
-uṣi, see 1221c.
nṣṇíh, euph., 223 a.
-us, 1154; us-stems, dein, 411 ff.
usṛ́, 371 j .
us or ur as 3d pi. ending, 169 b.
ū, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; combinations of final, 126, 129, 797f;
with preceding a-vowel, 127;
circumflexed, 128; uncombinable
in dual, 138 a.
ū-stems, dein, 347 ff.
-ū, 1179.
-ūka, see 1180f.
-ūtṛ, see 1182b.
-ūtha, see 1163d.
ū́dhan, ū́dhar, ū́dhas, 430 d.
ūna, in odd numbers, 477 a, 478 b.
-ūna, see 1177c.
-ūra, see 1188f.
ū́rj, euph., 219a.
√ūrṇu, so-called, 104b, 713; pf.,
80ig, 1071 e; ya-ger’d, 992 c.
-ūṣa, see 1197 c.
ūṣinan, 31, 59.
√ūh remove, infin., 968c; ya-ger'd,
992 c.
√ūh consider, euph., 240 b, 745 a;
pres., 894 d, 897b.
ṛ, pron. etc., 23—6; objectionable
pronunciation and transliteration
as ṛ i, 24 a; question of ṛ or ar in
roots and stems, 104d, e, 237;
combinations of final, 126, 129;
with preceding a-vowel, 127; exceptions, 127 a; impedes change of
preceding s to ṣ, 181a; changes
succeeding n to ṇ, 189 ff.; guṇa
and vṛddhi increments of, 235 ff.;
irregular changes, 241, 243; variable final ṛ of roots (so-called r).
242.
ṛ-roots, root-nouns from, 383 b, g.
ṛ-stems, dein, 369ff.
ṛ, variable (so-called r), roots in,
242, 245 b; their passive, 770 c;
aor., 885, 900b; prec, 922a; fut.,
935 a; pple, 957 b; root-infln.,
971; gerund in ya, 992 a.
√r, euph., 242 c; pres., 608 a, 699 a,
753 b, 643 d, 645, 716 a; passive,
770 c; pf., 783 a; aor., 834 a,
837b, 840 b, 847, 853, 862; pple,
957b; inf., 1002e; caus., 1042i;
caus. aor., 1047.
-ṛ, see 1182h.
ṛ i, ṛī, bad transliterations for r, r,
24 a.
√ṛc or arc, pf., 788a; aor., 862,
894 d, 897b; ya-ger'd, 992 b.
√ṛch, 608, 753b; pf., 788 b.
-ṛj, 383 k. 5.
√ṛñj or ṛj or arj streich out, pres.,
758a; pf., 788b; aor., 894d, 897b.
√ṛnv, 716 a.
-ṛt,' 383 k. 3.
ṛtvíj, euph., 219.
√ṛd, pple, 957 d.
j/ṛdh, pres., 694; pf., 788a; aor.,
832, 837, 838, 840 a, 847, 862;
des., 1029 b, 1030.
rbhuksán, dein, 434.
√ṛṣ, pf., 788 b.
ṛhánt, dein, 450 e.
ṛ, pron. and occurrence, 23—6; objectionable pronunciation and transliteration as ṛī, 24 a; as alleged
final of roots, 104d, 242 (and
see r, variable); changessucceeding n to n, 189 ff.
SANSKRIT INDEX . 525
1, pron. and occurrence, 23—6; objectionable pronunciation and transliteration as li or lri, 24 a; its
guṇa-increment, 236.
Ii, lri, bad transliterations for 1, 24a.
I, 23 a.
e, pron. etc., 27—9; combinations of
final, 131—3, 135; with final avowei, 127; uncombinable in dual
etc., 138 a, b, f; guṇa of i and ī,
235ff.; from radical* ā, 250d; as
alleged final of roots, 251, 761 f.
e, infin. in, 970 a, 971.
éka, dein, 482 a, b; used as article,
482 c; in making 9's 477 a, b.
ekaśruti, 90 c.
√edh, pf., 790c; desid., 1029b,
1031b; periph. pf., 1071c.
-ena, 1223 e.
-enya, 966 b, 1038, 1217.
-eya, 1216.
-eyya, 1216 e.
-era, see 1201a, 1226 b.
-eru, see 1192 a.
-elima, 966 d, 1201a.
eṣás, euph., 176 a.
āi, pron. etc., 27—9; combination
with final a-vowel, 127; as final,
131—3; vṛddhi of i and ī, 235 ff.;
as alleged final of roots, 251, 761 e;
for union-vowel ī in tense-inflection, 555 c; for e in subj. endings,
561a.
āi as gen.-abl. ending, 365 d.
o, pron. etc., 27—9; combination
with final a-vowel, 127; asfinal,
131, 132, 134, 135; before suffix
ya, 136 b; uncombinable, 138 c, f;
for final as, 175, 176; ar, 179 a;
guṇa of u and ū, 235ff.;as alleged final of roots, 251, 761g.
oṁ, euph., 137b.
-otṛ, see 1182b.
odana, euph., 137 b.
-ora, see 1201a.
oṣṭha, euph., 137 b.
oṣṭhya, 49.
āu, pron. etc., 27—9; combination
with final a-vowel, 127; as final,
131, 132, 134b; vṛddhi of u and
ū, 235 ff.
h, pron. etc., 67—9; makes heavy
syllable, 79; occurrence asfinal,
148, 170 a; for the labial and guttural spirants, 170d; from finals,
145, 170 a, 172; from r, 144, 178;
allows change of s to ṣ, 183.
ṃ or ṁ, pron. etc., 70—3; makes
heavy syllable, 79; occurrence as
final, 148; allows change of s to
ṣ, 183; occurrence, 204, 212,213 e.
k, pron. etc., 39, 40; relation to c,
42; to ś, 64; s to ṣ after, 180 ff.;
added to final ṅ, 21i ; from c, by
reversion, 214ff.; as final, and in
internal combination, 142, 217;
from ś, do., 145, 218; from ṣ,
226 e; anomalously from t, 151a";
to t, 151c.
-ka, prmy, 1186; scdry, 1222; ka
in -uka, 1180 a; in -aka, 1181.
-kaṭa, see 1245k.
kaṇṭhya guttural, 39.
√kan, pf., 786 e; aor., 899 d.
√kath, so-called, 1056.
√kam, aor., 868; pple, 955a.
kampa, 78d, 87d, 90b.
kámvant, euph., 212.
-kara, 1201a.
karmadhāraya, 1263 a.
√kal, caus., 1042g.
kalpa in compsn, 1302 i.
√kas, pple, 956 b.
√kā, inf. (?), 1013 b.
kāma, with accus., 272; in compsn
with infln.-stem, 968g.
kāmya as denom.-sign, 1065.
kāra, in sound-names, 18.
√kāś, int., 1017.
√kās, periph. pf., 1071 f.
kíyant, dein, 451.
√kir, 756.
√kīrt or kṛt, so-called, 1056.
√ku, pres.,*633.
√kuc, caus., 1042h.
√kup, pres., 761 a; aor., 840b;
pple, 956 b.
√kumār, so-called, 104b.
kuvíd, accent of verb with, 595 e.
√kr make, pres., 714, 715, 855a;
pf. 797 c, 800 k; aor. 831, 834 a
—40, 847, 894d; inf., 1002g, h;
prefixes s, 1087 d; in periph.
conjn, 1070—3; in compd conjn,
1091—4; special constructions,
268a.
526 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√kṛ, kir scatter, 242b; pres., 756;
aor., 885; prefixes s, 1087 d.
√kr commemorate, int., 1002 d,
1019 b.
√kṛt cut, pres., 758; aor., 847,
852 a; fuf., 935 b.
-kṛt, see 1105.
kṛt-sufflxes, 1138 a.
-kṛtvas, see 1105.
√kṛp, pres., 745b; aor., 834b;
caus., 1042b.
kṛśá as pple, 958.
√kṛs, 102a; euph., 226f; pf. 790c;
aor., 916 a, 920a; fut., 935d,
936 d; inf., 968 d.
√klp, 26; pf., 786a; fut, 935b,
936 d.
-knī, see 1176d.
√knū, caus., 10421.
√krand, pf., 794 d; aor., 847, 861a,
890b; int., 1002 g, h, 1017.
√kram, pres., 745d; aor., 833, 847,
899d, 904a; fuf. 935b; pple,
955Ja; inf., 968d; tvā-ger'd, 991b;
des., 1031b; caus., 1042 g; in
periphr. conj., 1070 c.
√krī, caus., 10421.
√krīḍ, caus., 1042 n.
√krùdh, aor., 847.
√kruś, aor., 916a, 920 a.
króṣṭu, kroṣṭṛ́, 343 k, 374.
√klam, pres.','745 d, 761a, 763;
pple, 955 a.
√klid, pple, 957 d.
√kliś, aor., 916 a.
kṣ, combinations of, 146, 221.
√kṣan, pple, 954 d; inf., 968 e.
√kṣam, pres., 763; fut, 935 b;
pple, 955a, 956 b; inf., 968 d;
caus., 1042 g.
kṣám, dein, 388.
√kṣar, aor., 890.
√kṣal, caus., 1042 n.
√kṣā, pres., 761 e; pple, 957a.
kṣāma as pple, 958.
√ksi possess, pres., 755; caus.,
lÖ42d, 1.
j/ksi destroy, pres., 761 b; fut,
93'5a; pple, 957 a; ya-ger'd, 922 a;
caus., 10421.
√kṣud, pple, 957 d.
√kṣudh, pres., 761 a; aor., 847.
√kṣubh, pple, 956 b.
kṣāipra-circumflex, 84 a.
√kṣṇu, pres., 626,
√kṣvid, pple, 957 d.
kh, pron. etc., 39; relation to ṣ, 61b.
√khan or khā, 102a; pass.', 772;
pf., 794e; aor., 890a; pple, 955b;
inf., 968 e; ya-ger'd, 992a; caus.,
1042g.
√khā, 102 a.
√khid, pf., 790 b; pple, 957 d.
√khud, khun, int., 1002 g, h.
√khyā, aor., 847, 894 c; fut., 936c.
g, pron. etc., 39; relation to j , 42;
from j by reversion, 214ff.
gata, in compsn, 1273 c.
√gam, 102 a; pres., 608 b, 747,
855a; aor., 833, 834b, 837-40,
847, 881 e, 887b; pf., 794e, 805a;
fut., 943 a; pple, 954 d; int.,
1002g, h, 1003; des., 1028e, 1031b;
caus., 1042g; root-noun, 383h.
√gal, int., 1002d.
√gā go, 102a; pre3., 660; aor., 830,
836,839, 884, 894 c; desid., 1028 d.
√gā sing, 251; pres., 761 e; aor.,
894d, 912; pple, 954c; inf., 968f;
ya-ger'd, 992a; caus., 1042j, k.
√gāh or gah, pple, 956e; int.,
1002 d.
√gir, gil, 756; caus., 1042b.
√gu, inf., 1002d.
guṇa, 27, 235 ff. √gúp, aor., 863a; inf., 968 c; yager'd, 992c; des., 1040.
√gur, pres., 756; aor., 834a; pple,
957 b.
√guh, euph., 155 b, d, 223 b, 240 c;
pres., 745c; pf., 793i; aor,, 847,
852, 916a, 920a, f; inf., 968e;
ya-ger'd, 992c; caus., 1042b.
√gṛ sing, euph., 242b; aor., 894d.
√gr swallow, euph., 242b; pres.,
756; aor., 836; inf., 968d; inf.,
1002 d.
√gṛ (or jāgṛ) wake, 1020; aor., 867,
871.
√grdh, pf., 786a; aor., 847.
go‚'euph., 134a, 236b ; dein, 361 c, f.
gdha, gdhi, 233 f. √grath or granth, pres., 730 a;
pf., 794h; caus., 1042h.
√grabh or grah, euph., 155b, 223g;
pres., 723, 729, 731, 732, 904d,
1066 b; pf., 794c, 801 i ; aor.,
834b, 847, 900b, 904a, b; fut..
936e; pple, 956 d, e; infin., 968f;
pass., 998 f; des., 1031b; caus.,
1042 b.
√gras, pple, 956 b.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 527
√glā, pres., 761 e; aor., 912; pple,
957a; caus., 1042j.
glāú, dein, 361a.
gh, pron. etc., 30; h derived from,
66; from h‚ by reversion, 214ff.,
402.
√ghaṭ, caus., 1042g.
√ghas, euph., 167, 233 f; jaks
from, 640; pf., 794 d; aor., 833j
847; pple, 954e.
ghoṣavant, 34.
√ghrā, pres., 671, 749 a; tvā-ger'd,
991 d; ya-ger'd, 992 c; caus.,
1042 d.
ṅ‚ pron. etc., 39; occurrence as final,
143, 386. 2, 3, 407 a; duplication
as final, 210; adds k before sibilant, 211.
c, pron. etc., 42—4; asfinal, 142;
from t before a palatal, 202 a,
203; n to ñ before it, 208 b;internalcombinations of, 217; reversion
to k, 216ff.; in pres., 681; pf.,
787; inf., 1002i; des., 1028f.
√cakās or cakāś, so-called, 677.
√cakṣ, pres., 444a, 621a, 628, 675.
catúr, dein, 482 g, h.
√cam, pres., 745d; pple, 955 a;
caus., 1042 g.
√car, euph., 242d; aor., 899 d; pple,
957 b; inf., 968 c; tvā-ger'd,
991b, c; inf., 1002d, 1003, 1017;
des., 1031b; in ppial periphr.
phrases, 1075 b,
√carv, pple, 956 a, 957b.
√cal, inf., 1003; caus., 1042g.
√cāy, pres., 761 e; tvā-ger'd, 991 c;
ya-ger'd, 992b; periphr. pf., 1071 f. √ci gather, reversion of c to k,
2161, 681, 787, 1028f; pres., 716 b,
855 a; aor., 889; tvā-ger'd, 991 d;
ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus., 10421.
√ci note, pres., 645; aor., 834 a.
√cit, reversion of c to k, 2161,
681,787, 1002i, 1028f; pf., 790b,
801e; aor., 840a, b; inf., 1002i,
1024; des., 1040; caus., 1042b.
√cesṭ, pf., 790 c.
√cyú, pf., 785a; aor., 840b, 866,
867, 868a, 870; inf., 968c; caus.,
1042 e.
ch, pron. etc., 42, 44 ; asfinal,142;
from ś after t or n, 203; after
other mutes, 203 a; in internal
combination, 220; duplication between vowels, 227; śch for, 227 a.
cha present-stems, 608.
√chad, pple, 957 d.
√chand, aor., 863a, 890b; caus.,
1042 g.
√chā, pres., 753 c; pple, 954c;
tvā-ger'd, 991b; caus., 1042k.
√chid, pres., 694 a; pf., 805b;
aor., 832a, 834d, 847, 887a;
pple, 957 d.
√chur, caus., 1042b.
√chṛd,pple, 957 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
j , pron. etc., 42—4; as final, 142;
in internal combination, 219; n
to ñ before it, 202 b; from t before sonant palatal, 202 a; reversion to g, 215ff.; in pf., 787; in
des., 1028 f.; before na of pple,
957 c; anomalously changed to d,
151c.
√jaks, 102a; euph., 233 f; pres..
640, 675; pple, 954 e.
jágat, dein, 450 d.
jagdha etc., 233f.
√jan, 102a; pres., 631a, 645, 680,
761 b, 772; pf., 794e; aor., 834b,
904 d; pple, 955 b; inf., 968 e;
des., 1031b.
jáni, dein, 343 f.
janús, dein, 415 c.
√jap, pple, 956b; inf., 1002d, 1017.
√jambh or jabh, inf., 968 e; int.,
1017.
√jalp, pf., 790 c.
√jas, aor., 871.
√jā, 102 a.
√jāgṛ, so-called, 104b, 1020; pf.,
1071 e.
jātya-circumflex, 84 b.
√ji conquer, reversion of j to g,
2161; in pf., 787; in des., 1028f;
aor., 839, 889, 894b, 904b; fut.,
935 a; caus., 10421; caus. aor.,
1047, 861b; periph. pf., 1071 f.
√ji injure — see jyā.
√jinv, 716 a, 749 b.
jihvāmūlīya, 39 a, 69.
√jīv, aor., 861 a; des., 1028h, 1031b ;
caus., 1042 n.
√jur, pres., 756, 766.
√jus, aor., 834b, 836, 840b; in
sajū́s, 225 a, 392b.
√jū, pres., 728; pf., 786 c.
526 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√kṛ, kir scatter, 242b; pres., 756;
aôr., 885; prefixes s, 1087 d.
√kr commemorate, int., 1002 d,
1019 b.
√kṛt cut, pres., 758; aor., 847,
852 a; fuf., 935 b.
-kṛt, see 1105.
kṛt-sufflxes, 1138 a.
-kṛtvas, see 1105.
√kṛp, pres., 745b; aor., 834b;
caus., 1042b.
kṛśá as pple, 958.
√kṛs, 102a; euph., 226f; pf. 790c;
aor., 916 a, 920a; fuf., 935d,
936 d; inf., 968 d.
√klp, 26; pf., 786a; fuf., 935b,
936 d.
-knī, see 1176d.
√knū, caus., 10421.
√krand, pf., 794 d; aor., 847, 861a,
890b; inf., 1002 g, h, 1017.
√kram, pres., 745d; aor., 833, 847,
899d, 904a; fuf. 935b; pple,
955Ja; inf., 968d; tvā-ger'd, 991b;
des., 1031b; caus., 1042 g; in
periphr. conj., 1070 c.
√krī, caus., 10421.
√krīḍ, caus., 1042 n.
√krùdh, aor., 847.
√kruś, aor., 916a, 920 a.
króṣṭu, kroṣṭṛ́, 343 k, 374.
√klam, pres.','745 d, 761a, 763;
pple, 955 a.
√klid, pple, 957 d.
√kliś, aor., 916 a.
kṣ, combinations of, 146, 221.
√kṣan, pple, 954 d; inf., 968 e.
√kṣam, pres., 763; fuf., 935 b;
pple, 955a, 956 b; inf., 968 d;
caus., 1042 g.
kṣám, dein, 388.
√kṣar, aor., 890.
√kṣal, caus., 1042 n.
√kṣā, pres., 761 e; pple, 957a.
kṣāma as pple, 958.
√ksi possess, pres., 755; caus.,
lÖ42d, 1.
j/ksi destroy, pres., 761 b; fuf.,
93'5a; pple, 957 a; ya-ger'd, 922 a;
caus., 10421.
√kṣud, pple, 957 d.
√kṣudh, pres., 761 a; aor., 847.
√kṣubh, pple, 956 b.
kṣāipra-circumflex, 84 a.
√kṣṇu, pres., 626,
√kṣvid, pple, 957 d.
kh, pron. etc., 39; relation to ṣ, 61b.
√khan or khā, 102a; pass.', 772;
pf., 794e; aor., 890a; pple, 955b;
inf., 968 e; ya-ger'd, 992a; caus.,
1042g.
√khā, 102 a.
√khid, pf., 790 b; pple, 957 d.
√khud, khun, int., 1002 g, h.
√khyā, aor., 847, 894 c; fuf., 936c.
g, pron. etc., 39; relation to j , 42;
from j by reversion, 214ff.
gata, in compsn, 1273 c.
√gam, 102 a; pres., 608 b, 747,
855a; aor., 833, 834b, 837-40,
847, 881 e, 887b; pf., 794e, 805a;
fut., 943 a; pple, 954 d; int.,
1002g, h, 1003; des., 1028e, 1031b;
caus., 1042g; root-noun, 383h.
√gal, int., 1002d.
√gā go, 102a; pre3., 660; aor., 830,
836,839, 884, 894 c; desid., 1028 d.
√gā sing, 251; pres., 761 e; aor.,
894d, 912; pple, 954c; inf., 968f;
ya-ger'd, 992a; caus., 1042j, k.
√gāh or gah, pple, 956e; int.,
1002 d.
√gir, gil, 756; caus., 1042b.
√gu, inf., 1002d.
guṇa, 27, 235 ff. √gúp, aor., 863a; inf., 968 c; yager'd, 992c; des., 1040.
√gur, pres., 756; aor., 834a; pple,
957 b.
√guh, euph., 155 b, d, 223 b, 240 c;
pres., 745c; pf., 793i; aor,, 847,
852, 916a, 920a, f; inf., 968e;
ya-ger'd, 992c; caus., 1042b.
√gṛ sing, euph., 242b; aor., 894d.
√gr swallow, euph., 242b; pres.,
756; aor., 836; inf., 968d; inf.,
1002 d.
√gṛ (or jāgṛ) wake, 1020; aor., 867,
871.
√grdh, pf., 786a; aor., 847.
go‚'euph., 134a, 236b ; dein, 361 c, f.
gdha, gdhi, 233 f. √grath or granth, pres., 730 a;
pf., 794h; caus., 1042h.
√grabh or grah, euph., 155b, 223g;
pres., 723, 729, 731, 732, 904d,
1066 b; pf., 794c, 801 i ; aor.,
834b, 847, 900b, 904a, b; fuf..
936e; pple, 956 d, e; infin., 968f;
pass., 998 f; des., 1031b; caus.,
1042 b.
√gras, pple, 956 b.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 527
√glā, pres., 761 e; aor., 912; pple,
957a; caus., 1042j.
glāú, dein, 361a.
gh, pron. etc., 30; h derived from,
66; from h‚ by reversion, 214ff.,
402.
√ghaṭ, caus., 1042g.
√ghas, euph., 167, 233 f; jaks
from, 640; pf., 794 d; aor., 833j
847; pple, 954e.
ghoṣavant, 34.
√ghrā, pres., 671, 749 a; tvā-ger'd,
991 d; ya-ger'd, 992 c; caus.,
1042 d.
ṅ‚ pron. etc., 39; occurrence as final,
143, 386. 2, 3, 407 a; duplication
as final, 210; adds k before sibilant, 211.
c, pron. etc., 42—4; asfinal, 142;
from t before a palatal, 202 a,
203; n to ñ before it, 208 b;internalcombinations of, 217; reversion
to k, 216ff.; in pres., 681; pf.,
787; inf., 1002i; des., 1028f.
√cakās or cakāś, so-called, 677.
√cakṣ, pres., 444a, 621a, 628, 675.
catúr, dein, 482 g, h.
√cam, pres., 745d; pple, 955 a;
caus., 1042 g.
√car, euph., 242d; aor., 899 d; pple,
957 b; inf., 968 c; tvā-ger'd,
991b, c; inf., 1002d, 1003, 1017;
des., 1031b; in ppial periphr.
phrases, 1075 b,
√carv, pple, 956 a, 957b.
√cal, inf., 1003; caus., 1042g.
√cāy, pres., 761 e; tvā-ger'd, 991 c;
ya-ger'd, 992b; periphr. pf., 1071 f. √ci gather, reversion of c to k,
2161, 681, 787, 1028f; pres., 716 b,
855 a; aor., 889; tvā-ger'd, 991 d;
ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus., 10421.
√ci note, pres., 645; aor., 834 a.
√cit, reversion of c to k, 2161,
681,787, 1002i, 1028f; pf., 790b,
801e; aor., 840a, b; inf., 1002i,
1024; des., 1040; caus., 1042b.
√cesṭ, pf., 790 c.
√cyú, pf., 785a; aor., 840b, 866,
867, 868a, 870; inf., 968c; caus.,
1042 e.
ch, pron. etc., 42, 44 ; asfinal,142;
from ś after t or n, 203; after
other mutes, 203 a; in internal
combination, 220; duplication between vowels, 227; śch for, 227 a.
cha present-stems, 608.
√chad, pple, 957 d.
√chand, aor., 863a, 890b; caus.,
1042 g.
√chā, pres., 753 c; pple, 954c;
tvā-ger'd, 991b; caus., 1042k.
√chid, pres., 694 a; pf., 805b;
aor., 832a, 834d, 847, 887a;
pple, 957 d.
√chur, caus., 1042b.
√chṛd,pple, 957 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
j , pron. etc., 42—4; as final, 142;
in internal combination, 219; n
to ñ before it, 202 b; from t before sonant palatal, 202 a; reversion to g, 215ff.; in pf., 787; in
des., 1028 f.; before na of pple,
957 c; anomalously changed to d,
151c.
√jaks, 102a; euph., 233 f; pres..
640, 675; pple, 954 e.
jágat, dein, 450 d.
jagdha etc., 233f.
√jan, 102a; pres., 631a, 645, 680,
761 b, 772; pf., 794e; aor., 834b,
904 d; pple, 955 b; inf., 968 e;
des., 1031b.
jáni, dein, 343 f.
janús, dein, 415 c.
√jap, pple, 956b; inf., 1002d, 1017.
√jambh or jabh, inf., 968 e; int.,
1017.
√jalp, pf., 790 c.
√jas, aor., 871.
√jā, 102 a.
√jāgṛ, so-called, 104b, 1020; pf.,
1071 e.
jātya-circumflex, 84 b.
√ji conquer, reversion of j to g,
2161; in pf., 787; in des., 1028f;
aor., 839, 889, 894b, 904b; fut.,
935 a; caus., 10421; caus. aor.,
1047, 861b; periph. pf., 1071 f.
√ji injure — see jyā.
√jinv, 716 a, 749 b.
jihvāmūlīya, 39 a, 69.
√jīv, aor., 861 a; des., 1028h, 1031b ;
caus., 1042 n.
√jur, pres., 756, 766.
√jus, aor., 834b, 836, 840b; in
sajū́s, 225 a, 392b.
√jū, pres., 728; pf., 786 c.
528 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√jr waste away, euph., 2161, 242b;
pres., 756, 766; pf., 793h, 794k;
pple, 957b; caus., 1042e.
√jñā, pres., 730b, 731; pf., 790b;
aor., 830, 838, 894c, 912; caus.,
1042j; caus. aor., 1047, 861b;
caus. des., 1030; caus. pple, 1051b.
√jyā or jī‚ pres., 761b; pf., 785 a,
794 b; aor., 912; pple, 954 c.
√jri, aor., 897 b.
√jval, aor., 899 d; caus., 1042g.
jh, pron. and occurrence, 42; as
final, 142 ; in internal combination,
220 b.
ñ, pron. etc., 42; from n after a
palatal, 201; before j , 202b; ś,
203; c, 208 b.
t, pron. etc., 45, 46; from a final
' palatal, 142; ś, 145, 218; ṣ, 145;
h, 147; adds t before s,'l99e;
added to final ṇ before sibilant,
211; from j in internal combination, 219; ch, 220; ks, 221; h,
222; ṣ, 226 b.
ṭh, pron. etc., 45, 46.
ḍ, pron. etc., 45; ordinary derivation,
46; 1 used for, 5 a, 54; from d
with preceding sibilant, 198 d, 199 d.
ḍh, pron. etc., 45, 46; lh used for,
54; from dh with preceding sibilant, 199 d; from h with following
t or th or dh, 222 b.
dhvam or dhvam, 226 c, 881b,
* 901a, 924 a.
ṇ, pron. etc., 45; ordinary derivation,
46; asfinal, 143; change of n to,
189—95; from n with preceding
sibilant, 199b; doubled as final,
210; addsṭ before a sibilant, 211.
t‚ pron. etc., 47, 48; from final
radical s‚ 145; do. in internal
combn, 167, 168; with preceding
sonant aspirate, 160; assim. to
following I. 162; added after ṭ
before s, 199 e; after n before s
or ṣ, 207; to palatal before palatal, 202; before ś, 203; anomalously changed to k, 151a; to ṭ,
151b; from k and j , 151c.
-t, added after short final vowel of
roof. 345, 376 b, 383 f—h, 1143 d,
1147d, 1196a, 1213a; irregular
cases, 1147e.
-ta, of pple, 952—6, 1176; ta-stems
in compsn, 1273, 1284; scdry,
1245 e.
√taṃs or tas, pf., 794 d; aor., 847.
√takṣ, pres., 628; pf., 790 b; pple,
956 a.
√taḍ, euph., 198 c.
tatpuruṣa, 1263 a.
taddhitá-suffixes, 1138 a.
√tan stretch, pass., 772; pf., 794f,
805a; aor., 833a, 834b, b:47,
881 e, 890 a, 899 d; pple, 954 d;
ya-gerJ
d, 992 a; des., 1028 e.
-tana, 1245 g—i.
tanū as refl. pronoun, 514 b.
√tap, pres., 761b; aor., 834d, 233 e,
865a; fut, 935b.
√tam, pres., 763; aor., 847; pple,
955 a; inf., 968 e.
-tama, 471-3,_487f, g, 1242a, b.
-tamam and-tāmam, 1111 e, 1119.
-taya, 1245 a.
-taye, infin. in, 970 e, 975.
-tar, see 1109a, and -tr.
-tara, 471—3, 1242 a, b.
-taram and tarām, 1111 e, 1119.
-tari, infin. in, 970 i, 979.
-tavant, pple in, 959, 960.
-tave and tavāi, infin. in, 970 b,
972.
-tavya, 962, 964, 1212i.
√tas, see taṃs.
-tas, 1152; advbl, 1098.
-tā, 1237.
-tat, impv. forms in, 570, 571, 618,
654, 704, 723, 740, 752 c, 760 c,
839, 1011a, 1032 a, 1043 d.
-tat, 383 k, 1238; advbl, 1100 b.
-tāti, 1238.
√tāy, pres., 761 e; periphr. pf.,
1071 f.
tālavya, 44 a.
-ti, 1157; ti-stems in compsn, 1274,
1287d; scdry, 519, 1157h; advbl,
1102 a—d.
√tij, euph., 219a; des., 1040.
-titha, 1242 e.
√tir, 756, 766.
√tu, pres., 633; pf., 786 c; aor.,
868 a; int., 1002g.
-tu, 1161, 970b, 972.
√tuj, caus., 1042b.
√tud, pres., 758; pple, 957 d.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 529
-turn, infin. in, 968, 970 b, 972,
987, 988.
√tur, pres., 756, 766; des., 1029a;
caus., 1042b.
-tur, 1182g.
√tul, caus., 1042b.
√tus, caus.. 1042b.
√tṛ/euph.,'242b; pres., 709, 715c,
756, 766; pf., 794k, 801 f, 804;
aor., 904 d; pple, 957 b; inf.,
968 d ; ya-ger'd, 992 a; inf., 1002d,
g, 1003, 1017; desid., 1029 a.
-tṛ, 943,1182; tṛ-stems, dein, 369 ff.;
govern accus.' 271 d; verbal use
of, 946; make periphr. fuf., 942—7.
tṛca, euph., 233 a.
tṛta, trtīya, euph., 243.
√trd, aor., 836 b, 837 a; pple, 957 d.
√tṛp, pres., 710, 758; pf., 786a;
fut., 936 d; aor., 847, 852a.
√trsjpf., 786a; aor., 840b, 847.
√trh. or tṛṃh, euph., 223b, 224b;
pres., 694a, 695; aor., 847, 916a.
tośás, dein, 415 b.
-tos, infln. in, 970 b, 972.
tta for dāta, 955 f, 1087 e.
tti for dāti, 1157 c.
-tna, 1245 g, h.
-tnu, 1196.
tman, dein, 426 b.
-tya, for -ya, 992; scdry, 1245 b—d.
√tyaj, 1087 f; euph., 219 a; pf.,
785 a[; fuf. 935 b; pple, 956 b.
-tyāi, infln. in, 970 e, 975 a.
-tra, 1185; or trā, advbl, 1099.
√trap, pf., 794h.
√tras, pf., 794h; aor., 899d.
√trā, 102a ; pres., 628; aor., 887d,
893 a, 895.
-trā, see -tra.
tri, dein, 482 e, f; in compsn,
1300 c.
-tri, see 1185g.
tristúbh, euph., 151 d.
-trī‚'376c, 1182.
ttru, see 1185g.
-tva, gerundival, 966 a, 1209 h;
scdry, 1239.
-tvatā, 1239 d.
-tvan, see 1169.
-tvana, 1240.
√tvar, caus., 1042g.
-tvara, see 1171.
-tvā, 990, 991, 993.
-tvānam, 993 c.
-tvāya, 993 b.
√tviṣ, pres., 621 a; aor., 916a.
-tvī, 993 b.
-tvīnam, 993 c.
√tsar, aor., 890a, 899 d.
th, pron. etc., 47, 48; with preceding sonant aspirate, 160.
-tha, 1163; ordinal, 487 c, 1242 d;
or tha, advbl, 1101.
-tham, advbl, see 1101a.
-thā, see tha.
-that, advbl, 1101a.
-thu, 1164.
d, pron. etc., 47, 48; anomalously
changed to d, 151b; do. from h,
404.
dákṣiṇa, dein, 525 c.
√dagḥ, euph., 155 b, 160 c; aor.,
833, 836 b, 838, 847.
√dad, 672; pf., 794j.
√dadh, 672; euph., 155 e, 160 c.
dadhán, dádhi, 343 i, 431.
dán, euph., 389 b.
dánt, dein, 396.
dantya, 47.
√dabh or dambh, euph., 155b;
pf., 794h; aor., 833; des., 1030.
√dam, pres., 763; pple, 955 a; tvāger'd, 991b,
-dam, advbl, see 1103b.
√day,pres., 761 f; periph. pf., 1071 f. √daridrā, so-called, 104b, 1024 a;
pf., 1071 e.
√dal, caus., 1042g.
√daś or daṃś, pres., 746; pf.,
794d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
√das, aor., 847, 852b, 899d.
√dah, euph., 155b, d, 223a; aor.,
890 a, 897 a, 444 a; fuf., 935 d;
int., 1002d; des., 1030.
√dā give, pres., 667—9, 672, 855 a;
pf., 803a; aor., 830, 834a, 836,
837, 839, 847, 884, 894*c; pple,
9Ô5f, 1087e, 1157 c; inf., 968 f;
tvā-ger'd, 991 b; ya-ger'd, 992 a;
des., 1030, 1034b.
√dā divide, 251; pres., 753c, 761 g;
aor., 834 a; pple, 954c, 955f,
957a, 1087e, 1157c; ya-ger'd,
992 a.
√dā bind, pres., 753 c, 761 g; aor.,
884; pple, 954 c
√dā protect, alleged, pf., 787.
-da, advbl, 1103 a, b.
-dānīm, advbl, 1103 c.
√dāś, pres., 444, 639c; pf., 790b,
803 a.
530 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√dās, pres., 444.
-di, advbl, 1103 e.
didyót etc., 336 e.
√div, see dīv.
dív, dein, 361 d.
√diś, euph., 218a; aor., 916, 920a;
int., 1017.
√dih, euph., 155b, 223a; aor., 916.
√dīkṣ, des., 1031b; caus., 1042 n.
√dīdī, so-called, 676; pf., 786b.
√dīdhī, so-called, 104b‚ 676; pf.,
786 b; aor., 897 b.
√dīp, aor., 861a.
√dīvplay, euph., 240 b; pres., 765;
pple, 955 c; inf., 968e.
√dīv or dev lament, pple, 957 a;
inf., 968e.
√du or dū, pres., 716b; pple, 957a.
ducchúnā, euph., 168b.
√dudh, 102 a.
√dus, euph., 240c, 1155a; aor.,
84f; caus., 1042b.
dus-, 225a, 1121; in compsn,
1284a, b, 1288e, f, g, 1304c, d.
√duh, euph., 155 b, d, f, 223 a;
pres., 621, 635; pf., 801 h; aor.,
916, 920a—f.
√dṛ pierce, euph., 242c; pf., 793 h;
pple, 957b; inf., 1002d, 1003,
1023; caus., 1042 e.
√dr heed, pres., 757, 773; aor.,
834 a, 881b.
√drp, aor., 847; fuf., 935 b, 936 d.
√dṛś, euph., 218 a; pf., 790 c, 801 e,
805b; aor., 832, 834b, 836, 840b,
847, 890a, 894a; fuf., 936 d; pass.,
998 f; root-noun, dein, 386. 3.
dṛś, dṛśa, drkṣa, with pron.-stems,
518.
√drh or drṃh, euph., 155 b, 223 b, d;
pres.,_758, *761b, 767; pf., 786 a.
devanagarī, I.
dosán, dos, 398 a. 432.
dyu and dyó, dein, 361 d, e.
√dyut, pf., 785a; aor., 840a, b,
847, 863 a, 890 a; inf., 1002g;
caus., 1042b.
-dyus, see 1105b.
√drā run, pple, 957 a; inf., 1024 a.
√drā sleep, aor., 912; pple, 954 c,
957 a; inf., 1024a.
√dru, pf., 797c; aor., 868; inf.,
1018a; caus., 1042e.
√druh, euph., 155 b, d, 223 a, c;
aor., 834 d, 847, 920 e, f.
dvandva, 1252 a.
dvā́r, dein, 388. 3.
dvi, empds with, 1300 c.
dvigu, 1312.
√dviṣ, euph., 226d, f; pres., 621 a;
aor., 916, 920 b.
dh, pron. etc., 47, 48; from t or th
after sonant aspirate, 160; h from,
223 g.
-dha, see -dhā.
√dham or dhma, pres., 750; pass.,
772; aor., 912; pple, 955b; yager'd, 992a.
√dhā put, euph., 223g; pres., 667
—9, 672, 855a; aor., 830, 834—
7, 839, 847, 884; pple, 954 c;
inf., 968f; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; des.,
1028 d, 1030, 1031 a; in periphr.
conj., 1070 c.
√dhā suck, 251; pres., 761 f; aor.,
868; pple, 954 c; inf., 968 f; yager'd, 992 a.
-dhāor -dha, advbl, 1104.
√dhāv rinse, pple dhāutá, 954 e.
√dhi (or dhinv), 716 a.
dhi, final of compds, 1155 g, 1276 b.
√dhū or dhu, pres., 712, 728 a,
755; pf., 790b; aor., 868a, 887c;
inf., 1002g, 1003, 1018 a; caus.,
1042m.
√dhūrv, aor., 887c; des., 1028h.
√dhr, pres., 757, 773; pf., 786 a;
aor., 834a, 867, 871; int., 1003.
√dhṛṣ, pf., 786 a; aor., 847, 852b;
pple, 956 b.
√dhmā, see dham.
√dhyā, pres., 761 e; aor., 912.
-dhyāi, infin. in, 970 g, 976, 1050f.
√dhvaṃs or dhvas, euph., 168;
pf., 790 c; aor., 847; caus., 1042 g.
√dhvan, pple, 955a, 956b; caus.,
1042 g.
√dhvṛ, pple, 955 e.
n, pron. etc., 47, 48; asfinal,143;
for final rdcl m, 143 a, 212 a;
change to n, 189—95; to ñ after
and before palatals, 201—3. 208 b;
combinations as root-final, 204;
loss as stem-final, 204 b; assim.
to palatals and linguals, 205; to
I. 206; before sibilants, 207;
treated as ns, 208, 209; duplication of final, 210; instability as
final, 256, 1203 b; used as unioncons., 257, 313, 482h; question
of final of pañcan etc., 484; final
n in seendry dervn, 1203 c.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 531
ná, comparative, 1122 h.
na added to tha or ta of 2d pi.,
549 a; forms so made, 613, 616b,
618, 621b, 654, 658, 669, 690,
704, 707, 723, 735b, 740, 752 b,
760 c, 831a, 839, 849 a.
-na, of pples, 952, 957, 1177; euph.,
161b: scdry, 1223 g, 1245 f; in
compsn, 1273, 1284.
√nakṣ, 102 a.
√nad,* caus., 1042g.
√nand, euph., 192a.
√nabh, euph., 192a; caus., 1042g.
√nam, pf., 786a; aor., 890a, 897b,
911, 912; fuf., 935 b; pple,
954d; inf., 968d; inf., 1017;
caus., 1042 g.
-nam, advbl, 1109a.
√naś be lost, euph., 192a; aor.,
847, 854b, 867; fuf., 935 d, 936a;
des., 1028.
√naś attain, euph., 218a; pf.,801g;
aor., 833, 834 b, 837 b; des., 1029 c.
√nas, aor., 837 b.
nás, dein, 387, 397.
-nas, 1152.
√nah, euph., 223g; pres., 761c.
-nā, see 1177.
nāgarī, 1 a.
nāsikya, 230 b.
ni, euph., 192 f.
-ni, 1158.
√niṃs, euph., 183 a; pres., 628.
√nij, euph., 219a; aor., 847; inf.,
1024.
nitya-circumflex, 84b.
√nind, pf., 790b; aor., 840 b.
nilay, quasi-root, 1087 c.
níś and niśā, 397.
nis, loss of initial of, 1087 a.
√nī, aor., 889, 896, 900b; fuf.,
935 a; inf., 968 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 c;
int., 1017, 1018a; periphr. pf.,
1071 f.
-nī, fem. ending, 1176 d, 1223 c.
nīḍá, euph., 198 d.
√nu or nū, pres., 626a; aor., 868a,
887c; inf., 1002g, 1003.
-nu, 1162.
√nud, aor., 834d, 904c; pple, 956b,
957 d; inf., 1017.
nf, dein, 371.
√nrt, euph., 192a; aor., 833, 847,
8ó2b; inf., 968d; tvā-ger'd, 991c.
néd, accent of verb with, 595 e.
néma, dein, 525 c.
nāú, dein, 361a.
p, pron. etc., 49, 50.
-p, caus.-sign, 1042 i—1; aor. from
such caus., 1047.
-pa, 1201.
pakvá as pple, 958.
√pac, pres. 761b.
√pat, pf., 794f, h; aor., 847; inf.,
1002g; des., 1030, 1031; caus.,
1042 g.
páti, dein, 343 d, e; in dpndt compsn,
1267 a; denom. conj. from, 1054 a.
path, pathí, pánthan, dein, 343j,
395, 433.
√pad, pres., 761 c; aor., 834b, d,
836, 837 b; pple, 957 d; inf.,
1002g; des., 1030.
pád, dein, 387, 389 b.
pada, lila ; pada-endings and cases,
lila , b.
√pan, pf., 794f; inf., 1002g.
pánthan, see páth.
pára, dein, 525 c.
parasmāi padam, 529.
párucchepa, euph., 168b.
palāy, quasi-root, 1087 c.
palyaṅg, quasi-root, 1087 c.
palyay, quasi-root, 1087 c.
√paś, pres., 761c.
paścima, dein, 525 c.
√pā drink, pres., 671, 749a, 855a;
aor., 830, 838; pple, 954c; yager'd, 992a; des., 1028d; caus.,
1042 k.
√pā protect, aor., 912; caus., 1042 m.
pāda, 79, 93 d.
padapūraṇa, 1122 b.
pinak, euph., 190 c.
√pinv, 699b, 716a, 749 b.
√piś, pres., 758; aor. 840b; pple,
956 b.
√pis or piṃs, euph., 226 d, f; pres.,
69'4a, 920a; aor., 190 c, 758a.
√pis, euph., 181 d.
√pīḍ, euph., 198d.
pīpī, conj.-stem, 676, 786b.
púṁs, púmāṃs, euph., 183a; dein,
394.
puraḥsara, puraskṛta, purogama, in compsn, 1302f.
purā́, pres. in past sense with, 778a.
puru, in compsn, 1284 b, 1290.
√pus, aor., 847.
√pū,* pres., 728; aor. (?), 868a,
J394d; inf., 968 e; caus., 1042 e.
pū́rva, dein, 525 c; in compsn, 1251 e,
1291c, 1302f.
532 SANSKRI T INDEX .
pūsán, dein, 426 a.
√pr /ill, euph., 242c; pres., 731,
761b, 766; pf., 793h; pple, 955d,
957b; inf., 968 c.
√pṛ pass, pf., 793h; aor., 896.
√pṛ be 6usy, pres., 757, 773.
√prc, pres., 694a; aor., 834c, 836b,
837 b, 840 b, 890, 894 a; pple,
957 c.
√pṛṇ, 731, 753.
pṛ́t, pṛ́tanā, 397.
pṛ́ṣant, dein, 450 c.
√p'yā or pī, pres., 761 e; pf., 785,
794b; aor., 912, 914 b; pple,
957a; caus., 1042k.
pragṛhya, 138.
pracaya or pracita accent, 90 a.
√prach, euph., 220; pres., 756a;
pf., 794 c, aor. 834c, 890-; pple,
954 b.
√prath, aor., 840b, 863a.
prabhṛti, in compsn, 1302e.
praślisṭa-circumflex, 84 d.
√prā, aor., 830, 889.
prāya, in compsn, 1302f.
√prī, pres., 731; aor. (?), 866,
868; caus., 1042m.
√pruth, ya-ger'd, 992b.
√prus, euph., 226d, 392b; pres.,
732, 1066 b.
plāy, quasi-root, 1087 c.
√plu, aor., 863 b, 866; ya-ger'd,
992 a; caus., 1042 a.
pluta, 78.
√psā, 102 a.
ph, pron. etc., 49, 50.
√phan, pf., 794h; inf., 1002g,
1003*.
√phal, pf., 794h.
phullá as pple, 958.
b, pron. etc., 49, 50; interchange
with v, 50 a.
√baṃh, euph., 223b.
√badh or vadh, aor., 904a; des.,
1029 a, 1040.
√bandh, euph., 155b; pres., 723,
730a; pf., 794d; fuf., 935b; inf.
968 d.
bahuvrīhi, 1293 b.
√bādh, euph., 155b; aor., 904d;
inf., 1002d, 1003; des., 1029a,
1031, 1040.
√budh, euph., 155b; aor., 834b, d,
839, 840 b, 847.
√bṛh, euph., 223 b; pres., 758; inf.,
1011; caus., 1042h.
bṛhánt, dein, 450 a.
bbh, occurrence, 151 e.
√brū, pres., 632; peculiar construction, 268 a.
bh, pron. etc., 49, 50; anomalously changed to a guttural, 151 d;
h from, 223 g.
√bhakṣ, 102 a.
√bhaj,' euph., 219a; pf., 794h;
aor., 834c, 867, 890 a; int., 935b;
inf., 968 d.
√bhañj, euph., 219 a; pres., 694;
pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
bhávant, 456, 514 c.
√bhas, euph., 233 f; pres., 678.
√bhās, inf., 968d.
√bhiks, 102 a.
√bhid,'aor., 832, 834 d, 836 a, 840 a,
847; pple, 957 d.
bhiṣáj, euph., 219a; denom. conj.
from, 1054 a.
√bhī, pres., 645, 679; pf., 786b;
aor., 831a, 840b, 866, 891, 897b;
caus., 10421, m; caus. aor., 1047;
periphr. pf., 1071 f, 1073a.
√bhīṣ, 1042 m; aor., 861a, 1047.
√bhuj bend, euph., 219 a; pple,
957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
√bhuj enjoy, euph., 219 a; pres.,
694a; aor., 836b, 847, 912.
√bhur, pres., 756; inf., 1002d.
bhúvas, euph., 176c.
√bhū, pf., 789a, 793b,800d; aor.,
829, 830, 836-9, 853, 924; inf.,
968 e; in periphr. conjn, 1070—72;
in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 d;
in compd conjn, 1091—4.
bhūta in compsn, 1273 c.
√bhṛ, pres., 645, 855 a; pf., 789 b,
797 c; aor., 890 a; inf., 1002 g, h,
1003; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
bhos, 456; euph., 174b.
√bhraṃc or, bhraś, pres., 767;
aor., 847; pple, 954b; caus.,
1042 h.
√bhrajj or bhṛjj, euph., 219b.
√bhram, pres!, 763; pf., 794 h;
pple, 955a; inf., 968d; tvā-ger'd,
991b; ya-ger'd, 992 c; caus.,
1042g.
√bhrāj, euph., 219 b; pf., 790 c,
794 h; aor., 833.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 533
m, pron. etc., 49, 50; asfinal,143;
asfinal radcl, 143 a, 212, 256; in
extrnl combn, 213; before rāj,
213 b.
-ma, prmy, 1166; scdry, 474, 487a,d,
1224 b, 1242 c.
√maṃh or mah, pf., 786a; caus.,
1042 g.
maghávan, dein, 428.
√majj, euph., 219a; pf., 801 g; aor.,
887 a;fut. ,936 a; pple, 957 c; inf. ‚
968 e; des., 1028j.
-mat, advbl, 1235 e.
√math or manth, pres., 730a,
731, 732, 1066b, 746; aor., 899d;
ya-gerJ
d, 992 b; caus., 1042 g.
√mad or mand, 102 a; pres, 628,
645, 764; aor., 833, 834d, 839,
840b, 887a, 897b, 899d, 904d;
pple, 958 b; caus., 1042 g.
√man, pf., 794f; aor., 834b, 840b,
881 e, 887 a, b; fuf., 935 b; pple,
954d; des., 1028e, 1029a, 1040;
special construction, 268 a, 994 e.
-man, 1168; man- and ma-stems,
1166 c; man-stems in compsn,
1277 b.
manas, in comp. with infln.-stem,
968 g.
-mane, infin. in, 970 d, 974.
-mant, 1235.
√mantr, so-called, 104 b, 1056,
1067, 1073 d.
mánthan, dein, 434.
√mand, 102a: see mad.
-maya, 161a, 1225.
-mara, 1201a.
√mah, seemaṃh.
máh, mahī, 400 a.
mahánt, dein, 450 b.
mahā́, 355 a.
mahāprāṇa, 37 d.
√mā measure, pres., 660, 663; aor.,
839J; pple, 954c; inf., 968f; tvāger'd, 991 b; ya-ger'd, 992a; des.,
1030.
√ma exchange, pres., 761 f. √mā bellow, pres., 660, 663, 672,
676c; aor., 868e.
mā́ṃs, māṃsá (and más), 397.
mātrā, in compsn, 1302g; euph.,
161a.
-māna. 584b, 1174.
mā́s, euph., 168aj dein, 389b, 397:
and see maṃs.
√mi fix, aor., 911; des., 1030.
-mi, 1167.
√mikṣ, 1033a; caus., 1042b.
mitrá, 1185 c.
-min, 1231.
√mil, fuf., 936 b.
√mī or mi damage, pres., 192c,
731, 761 b; aor., 911; des.,
1030; caus., 1042f.
√mih, euph., 223b; pf., 790b; aor.,
916a, 920a.
√mīv, pple, 955 b.
√muc, pres., 758, 761b, 855 a; aor.,
832, 834 c, 837 b, 839, 847, 890 a;
des., 1030.
√mud, aor., 837b.
√muṣ, pres., 732, 1066 b; pple,
956b; caus., 1042b.
√muh, euph., 223a, c; pres., 761 a;
aor., 847; pple, 955e.
√mūrch, 220a ; pres., 745 f; pple,
954 e:
mūrdhanya, 45.
√mṛ die, euph., 242 c; pres., 757,
773; aor., 834a, 837b.
√mṛ crush, pres., 731.
√mrj, euph., 219b; pres., 621a,
627, 745e; pf., 786a, 793i; aor.,
900a, 919, 920; fuf., 935b, 936d;
pple, 956b, d; inf., 958c; tvāger'd, 991 c; ya-ger'd, 992b; int.,
1002 g, 1003, 1017; des., 1028j;
caus., 1042b.
√mṛḍ, euph., 198d; caus., 1042b.
√mṛṇ, 731, 753 a.
√mrd, fuf., 936 d.
√mrdh, aor., 838, 847.
√mrś, pf., 786a; aor., 916, 920;
pple, 956b; int., 1002g, 1003,
1017.
√mṛṣ, aor., 834c, 840 a, 847.
-mna, 1224 c.
√mnā, 102 a; aor., 912.
√mruc, aor., 847.
√mlā, pres., 761 c; aór., 912; pple,
957a; caus., 1042j.
√mluc, int., 1002g.
y, pron. etc., 51, 55, 56; relation
to i-vowels, 55; nasaly, 71 c, 213d;
y as union-consonant, 258, 313 b,
844, 1112 e, 1151 d, 1230 e, 995 b;
resolved to i , 55, 113 b, 129 e;
cases of loss of i before, 233 a;
y of sfx treated as i , 1203 a.
ya contracted to i, 252, 769, 784 b,
794b.
ya as conj.-class-sign, 606, 759;
as passive-sign, 606, 768, 998 a;
534 SANSKRI T INDEX .
added to intens. stem, 1016; in
caus. sign, 1055 a; as denom.
sign, 1055-67.
-ya (or ya) of gerund, 990, 992,
993; of gerundive, 962, 963,1213.
-ya, prmy, 1187, 1213; ya-stems in
compsn, 1272; scdry, 1210—12.
yakán, yákṛt, 398 a, 432.
√yaj, euph., 219b, 784b; pres.,
628; pf., 784b; aor., 834c, 839,
890a,894d; inf.,968d; des.,1029c.
√yat, aor., 840b; pple, 956b.
yáthā, accent, 1101b; in compsn,
1313 c—e.
√yam, pres., 608b, 631a, 747;
pf., 790b; aor., 833, 836—9, 887a,
890a, 896, 897b, 911; fut., 935b ;
pple, 954d; inf., 968d; tvāger'd, 991b; caus., 1042g.
yama, 230 a.
√yas, aor., 847; pple, 956 b.
-yas for -īyas, 470 a.
√yā, 102a; aor., 894c, 912, 914c.
-yā, 1213 d.
-yin, see 1230e.
√yu unite, pres., 626 a, 755; yager'd, 992 a.
√yu separate, pres., 608a, 645; aor.,
838, 868 a, 889, 894 b ; inf., 1018 a;
caus., 1042 e.
-yu, 1165; see 1178h—j.
√yuj, euph., 219a; pres., 758a;
aor., 832, 834b, 836b, 837 a,
839, 840 b, 847, 887 a; root-noun,
386.
√yudh, aor., 834 d, 836 b, 839,
887 a.
√yup, inf., 1017.
yúvan, dein, 427.
yūṣá, yūṣán, 432.
yóṣan, dein, 426 b.
r, pron. etc., 51, 52; r and 1, 53b;
r and s as corresponding sonant
and surd, 117b, 158a, 164; final,
144, 169; words ending in original
r, 169 a; combination asfinalrdcl,
165; as other, 178; avoidance of
double, 179; s or r as final of
certain forms, 169b; from s aftera, 176 c; S to ṣ after, 180ff.;but
not before, 181a, b; changes
succeeding n to ṇ, 189ff.; duplication of consonant after, 228;
svarabhakti after, 230 c.
r-endings in 3d pi., 613, 618, 629,
699b, 738a, 752b, 799, 813, 818a.
ra and ra as increments of r, 241.
-ra, prmy, 1188;scdry, 474,' 1226,
1242 c.
√rakṣ, aor., 899 d.
√raj or rañj, euph., 219 a; pres.,
746, 767; caus., 1042 g.
√radh or randh, pf., 786 a, 794h;
aor., 847.
√ran, pf., 786a; aor., 899d.
√rabh, pf., 786 a‚ 794h; aor., 834 d,
897b; des., 1030.
√ram, aor., 911, 912; pple, 954d;
inf., 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991b; caus.,
1042 g.
√rā give, pres., 660, 666, 672;
a_or., 839, 896.
√ra bark, pres., 761 e.
√rāj, euph., 213b, 219b; pf., 794h.
√rādh, pf., 794h; aor., 836; des.,
1030.
√ri or rī, caus., 10421.
-ri, 1191.
√ric, pres., 761b; aor., 834 c, 839,
847, 890.
√riś, aor., 916.
√riṣ, euph., 226f; aor., 847, 852a,
853, 870; caus., 1042 b.
√rih, euph., 223b; int., 1017.
√rī, see rI.
√ru, pres., 626, 633, 755.
-ru, 1192.
√ruc, aor., 834 c, 837 b, 840 b, 847;
desid., 1031b.
√ruj, euph., 219a; aor., 832; pple,
957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991c.
√rud, pres., 631; aor., 847; tvāger'd, 991 d.
√rudh, pres., 694a, 758a, 855a;
pf., 801 h; aor., 832, 834d, 847,
887a, 890a; inf., 968d; ya-ger'd,
992 b.
√ruś, aor., 916; caus., 1042 b.
rúśant, dein, 450 c.
√ruṣ, pple, 956 b.
√ruh, euph., 223b, d; aor., 840b,
847, 853, 916, 920a, b; fuf.,
935 d; inf., 968d; ya-ger'd, 992c ;
caus., 10421.
repha, 18.
rāí, dein, 361b, f.
-rhi, advbl, 1103 d.
I, pron. etc., 51, 53; 1 and r, 53b;
1 for r in certain verbal prefixes,
1087c; nasalI.71 b, c, 206, 213 d;
as final, 144; assim. to, 117 g; of t,
162; of n, 206; of m, 213 d;
SANSKRI T INDEX . 535
asserted s to s after, 180 b; duplication of consonant after, 228 a;
svarabhakti after, 230 d.
-la, prmy, 1189; scdry, 1227.
√lag, pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991c;
caus., 1042 g.
√lajj, pres., 754.
√lap, pple, 956 b; infln., 968 c.
√labh, aor., 834 d; fuf., 935b;
des., 1030.
√lal, caus., 1042 g.
√likh, fuf., 936b.
√lip, pres., 753, 758; aor., 834d;
847.
√liś, aor., 916.
√lih, euph., 223 b; aor., 916, 920a.
√lī cling, aor., 911; pple, 957 a;
ya-ger'd, 992a; caus., 10421, m.
√lī totter, inf., 1018 a, 1022.-
√lup‚ pres., 758, 761b; aor., 887 a.
√lubh, pres., 761a.
√lū, pres., 728 a; pple, 957a.
1, pron. etc., 5 a, 54.
v, pron. etc., 51, 57, 58; relation
to u-vowels, 57a; interchange
with b, 50 a; nasal v, 71c, 213 d;
resolved to u, 58 a, 113 b; cases
of loss of u before, 233 a; duplication of consonants after, 228 a.
va, contracted to u, 252, 769, 784,
794 b.
-va, prmy, 1190; scdry, 1228; advbl,
1102 e, f.
√vakṣ, pple, 956 b.
√vac/euph., 2161; pres., 660; pf.,
784, 789 d; aor., 847, 853,854 a.
√vañc, euph., 2161; pf., 786 a.
-vat, advbl, 1107, 1233 f; scdry,
383 k. I. 1245j.
√vad, 102a; pres., 738a; pf.,
784; aor., 899 d, 904 d; pple,
956d; inf., 1017; desid., 1031b.
√vadh, see badh.
√van, pf., 786a, 794f; aor., 839,
887 b, 912, 914; pple, 955 b;
des., 1028g.
-van, prmy, 1169; scdry, 1234; vanstems in compsn, 1277, 1287 b.
-vana, -vani, -vanu, 1170; -vana,
12451.
-vane, infln. in, 970 d, 974.
-vant, 517, 959, 1233; prmry,
1233 g.
√vand, 102 a.
√vap, pf., 784; fuf., 935b; pple,
954 b.
√vam, pres., 631a; pple, 955 a;
tvā-ger'd, 991b; caus., 1042g.
vam (from vṛ), 543 a.
-vam, advbl, 'll02b.
-vaya, 1228 b.
-vara, 1171.
-varī, fem. to van, 1169, 1171,
1234a.
varga, 32.
√varṇ, so-called, 1056.
-vala, 1228 b.
√vaś, pres., 638, 660; pf., 784,
786 a.
√vas shine, euph., 167 ; pres., 608b,
753b; pf., 784; aor., 834b; pple,
956 b, d.
√vas clothe, euph., 167; pres., 628,
631a, 638a; pf., 786 a.
√vas dwell, euph., 167; pf., 784;
aor., 840b, 883; fuf., 935d; pple,
956b, d; inf., 968 c; tvā-ger'd,
991c; in periphr. conj. 1070 c;
periphr. pf., 1071 f.
-vas, 1173b: and see vāṃs.
√vah, euph., 137 c, 223 b, 224b;
pf., 784; aor., 837b, 839, 840b,
890 a; fuf., 935 d; pple, 954b;
inf., 1002g, 1017; at end of
compds, 403.
j/vā blow, aor., 912; pple, 957a.
√vā droop, pres., 761 e.
√vā or v i weave, pres., 761 f; pf.,
784, 801 b; fuf., 935 c; pple, 954 e;
inf., 968f; caus., 1042k.
√vāṃs (or -vas), of pples, 584 c,
802—6, 1173; vāṃs-stems, dein,
458 ff.
vāgháṭ, dein, 444 a.
√vāś/pf., 786a; aor., 861a.
ví, dein, 343 h.
-vi , 1193.
vikampana, 87 d.
√vic, int., 1024.
√vij, euph., 219a; aor., 834c;
fuf., 935 b. 936 c; pple, 957 c;
inf., 1017, 1024.
-Vit, see 1193b.
√vid know, 102a; pres. 613, 618,
621a; pf., 790a, 803a; fuf., 935b;
inf., 968d; des., 1031 b; periphr.
pf., 1071 f, 1073 a; periphr. aor.
√and pres., 1073 b, c
v i d find, 102a; pres., 758; pf.,
805 b ; aor., 847, 852 a; pple, 957 dvidhā , in compsn, 1302 i.
536 SANSKRI T INDEX .
-vin, 1232.
√vindh, pres., 758.
√vip, aor., 840b; cans., 1042 b.
virāma, 11.
√viś, euph., 218 a; pf., 803a, 805b;
aor., 834b, 916, 920 a.
víśva, dein, 524; in compsn, 1251 e,
1280 c, 1298 c.
√viṣ‚ euph., 225 a, 226 d, f; aor.,
916; inf., 1024.
visarga, visarjanīya, 67: and
√vī, inf., 1017, 1024 a.
√vṛ cover, 102 a; pres. (ūrṇu),
713; aor., 831a, 834 a, 836b,
839, 840b, 900b; inf., 968 d;
int., 1002 g.
√vr choose, 102a; euph., 102 a,
242 c; pf., 797 c; aor., 837b, 840b:
inf., 968 d; caus., 1042 e.
√vṛj, euph., 219a; pf., 786a, 803a;
aor., 832, 834 c, 836—9, 919,
920a; inf., 1002g.
√vrt, pres., 643c, 855a; pf., 786a;
aor., 832, 834b, 836b, 839, 840a,
847, 904 d; fuf., 935 b, 943 a;
inf., 968e; inf., 1002g, 1003,
1017, 1023.
vrtrá, 1185 c.
vrddhi, 27, 235 ff. √vrdh, pf., 786a; aor., 847, 852a, b,
8*97b; fuf., 943a; inf., 968e.
√vrs, pf., 786a; aor., 847; inf.,
968 d.
vfsan, dein, 426 b.
√vṛh, aor., 916, 920 a.
voc, quasi-root, 854 a.
-vya, 1228 c.
√vyac, 1087f; pres., 682; pf., 785,
794 b.
vyañjana, 31.
√vyath, pf.. 785.
√vyadh, pres., 767; pf., 785, 794b;
fuf., 936b; pple, 954b; inf., 968f;
caus., 1042 g.
√vyay, pres., 761 f. √vyā or vī, pres., 761 f; pf., 785,
794b, 801c; aor., 847; fuf., 935c;
pple, 954 c; caus., 1042 k.
√vraj, euph., 219 b; aor., 899 d.
√vraśc, euph., 221b; pple, 957c;
tvā-ger/d, 991c.
√vlī, pres., 728b; pple, 957a; inf.,
1017; caus., 10421.
ś, pron., etc., 59, 63, 64, 119;relation to ṣ, 63 a; as final, 145;
in intrnl combn, 218; with preceding t or n, 203.
-śa, 1229.
√śaṃs, pf., 790 c; ya-ger'd, 992c.
√śak, aor., 837 a, 839, 847; pple,
956 b; des., 1030, 1040.
śakán, śákṛt, 398, 432.
√śaṅk, aor., 904 d.
√śad prevail, pf., 786.
√śad fall, pple, 957 d.
√śap, aor., 233e; inf., 968c.
√śam labor, pres., 634, 763.
√śam be quiet, pres., 763; aor.,
847; pple, 955 a; caus., 1042g.
√śaś, pf., 794j.
√śas, aor., 839.
-śas, advbl, 1106.
√śā, pres., 660, 662, 753c, 761 g;
aor., 834 a; pple, 954 c; caus.,
1042 k.
√śās (or śis), pres., 444, 639,
675; aor., 8*47, 852a, 854c; pple,
954e, 956b; inf., 968c; ya-ger'd,
992 c; desid., 1031b; āśís from,
225 a, 392 b.
√śiñj, euph., 219 a; pres., 628.
√śis leave, euph., 226f; pres., 694a,
758 a; aor., 847, 853.
√śis, see śās.
√śī'lie, pres., 628, 629; pf., 806a;
fuf., 935a; pple, 956c; ya-ger'd,
992 c.
√śuc, pres., 631a; aor., 847; inf.,
968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991c; caus.,
1042 b.
√śudh, caus., 1042h.
√śubh, pres., 758; aor., 852a, b
840 b; caus., 1042b.
√śuṣ, pres., 761a.
śúṣka as pple, 958.
√śū, see śvā.
√śūṣ, euph., 240b.
√śr crush, euph., 242b;-pres., 731,
pf., 793h; aor., 900a, 904b;
pple, 955d, 957 b; inf., 968d.
√ścand, inf., 1002g.
√śnath, pres., 631a; aor., 867.
√cyā orśī, pres., 761 e; pple, 954c
957 a.
√śrath, pres., 732, 1066b, 758;
pf., 794h; pple, 956 d.
√śram, pres., 763; pf., 794h; aor.,
847; pple, 955 a; caus., 1042 g.
√śrā, pres., 761 e; pple, 954b;
caus., 1042j; caus. aor., 861b,
1047.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 537
•√śri, aor., 831, 867, 868, 889a;
inf., 968e; caus., 10421.
√śriṣ, aor., 847.
√śrī, pple, 955 d.
√śrīv, s ee srīv.
√śru, euph., 243; pres., 699b,
711; pf., 797c; aor., 831, 836,
838, 839, 853, 866, 867; desid.,
1040; caus., 1042e.
√śruṣ, 102a.
√śliṣ,' euph., 226d, f; pres., 761c;
aor., 847, 916.
√śvañc, aor., 863 a.
śván, dein, 427.
√śvas, pres., 631; pple, 956 b;
caus., 1042g.
√śvā or śvi or śū, pf., 786 c,
79ib ; aor., 847, 868, 897b; pple,
957a; inf., 968 e.
√śvit, aor., 832, 890.
ṣ, pron. etc., 59, 61, 62, 120, 182;
relation to ś, 63 a; ordinary derivation, 46; exceptional occurrence,
182; as final, 145, 145b; s changed to, 180—8; recurrence avoided,
181c, 184e, 1028i; as root final,
182 a, 184 c, 225, 226; changes
succeding n to ṇ, 189 ff.; assim.
of dental after, 197; from ś, 218.
-sani, (or -sani), infin. in, 970 h,
978, 1159c, 1160a.
ṣaṣ, euph., 146b, 199c.
-ṣe (or -se), infin. in, 970 c, 973 b.
√sṭhīv, euph., 240b; pres., 745 g,
765; pf., 789c; pple, 955c; tvāger'd, 991 d. _
-syai (or -syai), infin. in, 970 g,
'977.
s, pron. etc., 59, 60; s and r as
corresponding surd and sonant,
117b, 158a, 164; s or r as final
of certain forms, 169b; as final,
145, 169, 170 a; combinations of
final rdcl s, 145b, 166-8; of
other, 170—7; exceptional cases,
171, 173; final as, 175, 176; ās,
177; s to s, 180—8; exceptional
cases, 181,'l84e, 185c, d, 186a;
ṭ adds t before, 199 e; final n
adds (retains) s, 208, 209; s lost
between mutes, 233 c—f; in saor., 834, 881, 883; after a vowel,
233 b; exceptional combination
after such loss, 233 f; s anomalously from final root-consonant,
406 a; s before ām of gen. pi.,
313 a, 496 c; in aor., 874 ff.; in
fut., 931 ff.; in desid., 1027ff.
-s, advbl, 1105.
-sa, 1197.
sa-, 1121 e; in compsn, 1288 g,
1304 f—h, 1313 f.
saṁvṛta a, 21.
sákhi, dein, 343 a—c.
sakthán, sákthi, 343 i, 431.
√sagh, aor., 836b.
√sac, pres., 660; pf., 794f; aor.,
840 b; saśc from, 673, 675.
√saj or sañj, euph., 219 a; pres.,
746; pf., 794d, h, 801 h; aor.,
834c, 887a; inf., 968f; des.,
1028i; caus., 1042h.
√sad, pres., 748; aor., 847, 852a,
853, 899d; fut., 935b, 936c;
pple, 957d; inf., 968d.
√san or sā, pf., 804; aor., 847,
853, 899 d; pple, 955b; int.,
1002g; des., 1028g, i, 1032a.
-sani, infin. in, see -ṣaṇi.
saṁdhi, 109.
saṁdhyakṣara, 28 a, 30.
sannatara,' 90 c.
√sabhāg, so-called, 104b, 1067.
samānākṣara, 30.
samprasāraṇa, 252 a.
samrāj etc., *213b.
-sara, 1201 a.
sarágh or saráḍ, 389 b.
sárva, dein, 524; in compsn, 1251 e,
1298 c.
√saśc, pres., 444, 673, 675.
sás, euph., 176 a, b.
-sas, 1152.
√sah, euph., 186a, 223b, 224b;
pres., 628; pf., 786 a, 790 b,
803 a; aor., 837, 838, 887 a, 897 a,
b, 899 d; fut., 935 d; pple, 955e;
inf., 968d; des., 1030; at end
of cmpds, 405.
sahá, in cmpsn, 1304 f, g.
√sā or si &ind, pres., 7ó3c; aor.,
830, 834 a, 839, 868 a, 894 c;
fut., 935a, 936b; pple, 954c;
inf., 968f; ya-ger'd, 992a; caus..
1042 k.
-sāt, advbl, 1108.
√sādh, aor., 861 a.
-sāna, ppial words in, 897b, 1175.
√sāntv, so-called, 104b.
√si, see sā.
√sic, pres., 758; aor., 847; tvāger'd, 991 d; caus., 1042h.
538 SANSKRI T INDEX .
√sidh repel, fuf., 935b.
√sīv, pres., 761 c, 765, pple, 955 c,
des., 1028h, i. √su press out, pres., 699b, aor.,
839, 840b, 867, fuf. 935 a, yager'd, 992 a.
su-, 1121h, i , in compsn, 1284 a,
b, 1288, 1304 c, d.
-su, see 1178f.
√subh, pres., 758.
√sū or su, pres., 626, 628, 755,
pf., 789a, aor., 868a, fuf., 935a,
936 b, 939 b, inf. 968 d, e.
√sūc, aor., 861.
√sūd, aor., 871.
√sṛ, pf, 797c, 806a, aor., 847,
caus., 1042 e.
√srj, euph., 216f. 2í9b, c, aor.,
*834b, c, 840b, 890, fut., 936d.
√srp, euph., 151 d, pf, 790c,
aor, 834d, 847, fuf., 935b, 936d,
inf., 968e, int., 1002g.
-se, infln. in, see -ṣe.
soṣman, 37 d.
sk,* original of ch, 42.
√skand, aor., 833, 890b, pple,
957 d, ya-ger'd, 992b, inf.,
1002 g, h.
√skabh or skambh, pres., 730,
732, 1066b, pf., 786a, 790b,
794 d.
√sku, pres., 626 a, int, 1017.
√stan, pres., 631a, aor., 899d.
√stabh or stambh, euph., 233 c,
pre«., 730, 732, 1066b, pf., 794d,
pple, 956 b.
-stāt for -tat, advbl, 1100 b.
√stigh, desid., 1031b.
√stu, pres., 626, 633, pf., 797c,
aor., 866, 894b, d, fuf., 935a,
ya-ger'd, 992 a, desid., 1028i,
caus., 1042e.
√stṛ, euph., 242c, pf., 801 f, 806a,
aor., 831, 834 a, 885, 900 a, pple,
957b, inf., 968d, ya-ger'd, 992a.
stṛ́, dein, 371k.
√stṛh, aor., 916.
√styā, pres., 761 e; pple, 957a.
strī́, dein, 366, 367 c.
√sthā, euph., 233c, pres., 671,
749 a, aor., 830, 834 a, 836, 837,
840 a, 847, 884, 894 c, pple, 954 c,
inf , 968 f, caus. aor , 861 b, 1047,
in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 c.
-sna, 1195.
√snā, caus., 1042j.
√snih, euph., 223 a, c.
√snu, pres., 626a.
-snu, 1194.
sparśa, 31, 32.
√spaś, aor., 834c.
√spṛ, aor., 831, 836 b, 839.
√sprdh, euph., 242 d, aor., 834b,
840 b.
√spṛś, euph., 218 a, aor., 916,
920 a, fuf., 936d.
√spṛh,euph., 223b, d, caus., 1042d.
√sphā, pple, 954c, caus., 1042m.
√sphuṭ, fuf., 936 b.
√sphṛ, pres., 756, tvā-ger'd, 991 d,
caus., 1042 b.
sphoṭana, 230 e.
sma, in pronom 1 dein, 493, 496a,
503.
sma, pres. in past sense with, 778 b, c.
√snri, tvā-ger'd, 991 d, caus.,
10421, periphr. pf., 1071 f. √smṛ, pass., 770 c, tvā-ger'd, 991d,
caus., 1042 e.
sya as denom. sign, 1064.
√syand, pf., 785a; aor., 861a,
890b, fut., 943 a, pple, 957d,
tvā-ger'd, 991 d, inf., 1002g.
√syam, pf., 794h.
syás, euph., 176a.
-syāi, infln. in, see -ṣyāi.
sráj, euph., 219 a.
√sras or sraṃs, euph., 168, pf.,
790 c, aor., 833, 847, ya-ger'd,
992 b.
√sridh, aor._, 847, 852 b.
√sriv (orśriv), euph., 240 b , pres.,
765, caus., 1042b.
√sru, pf., 797c, aor., 868, caus.,
1042 e.
sva, 513b, 516 e, dein, 525 c.
√svaj, euph., 219 a, pres., 746, pf.,
794h, aor., 863 a, tvā-ger'd,
991c.
svátavas, euph., 168a, 415b.
√svad, pple, 954 f. √svan, pf., 794h, aor., 899d, inf.,
1002 g.
√svap, pres., 631, pf., 785b, 794b,
aor, 867, fuf., 935b, pple, 954b,
des., 1028h, caus., 1042g.
svayam, in compsn, 1284 b.
√svar, aor., 890a, 899 d.
svàr, dein, 388.
svara, 30, 81.
svarabhakti, 230 c—e.
svarita, 81.
svávas, euph., 168 a, 415 b.
√svid, pple, 957 d.
SANSKRI T INDEX . 539
h, pron. etc., 59, 65, 66, 119; from
dh and bh, 223 g; asfinal, 147;
compensating aspiration of initial,
147, 155b; with following t or
th, 160 a; with preceding final
mute, 163;m before h and another cons., 213 g; reversion to gh,
214 ff., 222; in inflection, 402,
637; inpf., 787; in intens., 1002i;
in desid., 1028 f; internal combn,
222—4; anomalously changed to
a sibilant, 150 f; to d, 404; duplication of a cons, after, 228 a;
nāsikya added after, 230 b; loss
before hi, 1011a.
-ha, advbl, 1100 a, 1104b.
√had, pple, 957 d.
√han, euph., 192b, 2161, 402,
637, 787; pres., 637, 673, 709;
pf., 794 e, 805a; aor., 899 d; fut.,
935b, 943 a; pass., 998f; pple,
954 d; inf., 968 d; inf., 1002 g,
h, i, 1003; des., 1028e, f; caus.,
1042 m; root-noun, 383 h, 402.
hánta, accent of verb with, 598 a.
√has, jakṣ from, 640.
√hā move, pres., 660, 664; des.,
1028 d; caus., 1042 d.
√hā leave, pres., 665, 761b; aor.,
830, 889, 912; fut., 936 c; pple,
957a; inf., 968f; caus. aor.,
861b, 1047.
√hās, 102 a, 912.
√hi, euph., 192 c, 2161, 674, 787;
pres., 699 b, 716 a; aor., 831,
839, 840 b, 847, 889 a, 894 d;
des., 1028 f.
hi, 595e, 1122b.
-hi, advbl, 1100 c.
√hiṃs, euph., 183 a; pres., 687,
696; des., 1031b.
√hinv, 716 a.
√hīḍ, euph., 240b; pf., 786b;
caus., 1042 b.
√hu, pres., 645, 647 c, 652; periphr.
pf. etc., 1071 f, 1073 c.
√hū or hvā, pres., 761 f, 755; pf.,
794b; aor., 834a, 847, 887c,
912; fuf., 935 c; inf., 968f; caus.,
1042 k; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
√hṛ seize, aor., 834a, 890 a; inf.,
968 d; caus., 1042 e.
√hṛ́d, hṛ́daya, 397.
√hṛṣ, aor., 847; pple, 956b.
√hnu, pres., 626a.
√hras, pple, 956 b.
√hrī, pres., 645; aor., 840b; pple,
957a; caus., 10421; periphr. pf.,
1071 f. √hvā, see hū.
√hvr or hvar, euph., 242c; pres.,
6S2; aor., 863a, 890; pple, 955e.
GENERA L INDEX.
a-aonst (simple aorist, 2), 824, 846
—54 m the later language, 846,
roots forming it in the older language, 847, inflection, 848, modes,
849—51, participles, 852, irregularities, 853, 854
a-class (first, bhū-class) of verbs,
606, 734—50 formation of stem,
734, inflection, 735—43, roots of
the class, 744, irregularities, 745
—50
á-class or accented a-class (sixth,
tud-class) of verbs, 606, 751—8
formation of stem, 751 inflection,
752, roots of the class, 753, 754,
irregularities, 755—8
a-conjugation — see conjugations
a- or ā-declension, transference of
cons-stems to, 399 415 a, 429 a,
437, 441b 1148i, 1149a, 1166c,
1209, 1315
a-stems (tense-stems), uniform inflection of, 733 a
abbreviation of consonant-groups,
231—3
ablative case, uses of, 289—93, ablative of comparison, 292 b; with
prepositions, 293, 1128, used adverbially, 1114, abl infinitive, 983,
abl by attraction with mfin 983 b,
abl use of adverbs in tas, 1098 d,
abl as prior member of compound,
1250 f
absolute use of instrumental, 281g,
of genitive, 300 b, of locative,
303b-d, of gerund, 994e
absolutive — see gerund
abstract nouns, secondary derivation
of, 1206, 1236—40
accent, general, 80—97 its varieties,
80-6, accentuated texts, 87 modes of designating, 87, 88, illustration of RV method, pp 518—9,
over-refinements of Hindu theory,
90, modern delivery of ancient
accented texts, 91, no sentence
accent, 92, accentless words, 93,
words doubly accented, 94, 1255,
1267 d, accent of protracted syllable, 78 a, freedom of place of
accent, 95, — changes of accent
m vowel combination, 128 130,
135a — accent in declension,
314-20, of vocative, 92a, 314,
change of accent in monosyllabic
etc. declension, 316—9, in numeral, 482g, 483 a—c, of fractional, 488 a, of case-forms used as
adverbs, 1111 g, 1112e, 1114d,
different accent of action-nouns
and agent-nouns, 1144 a, of determinative and possessive compounds, 1295, — accent of personal
endings, 552—4, in relation to
strong and weak forms, 5o6, of
personal verb-forms in the sentence, 92b, 591—8, of periphrastic formations, 945, 1073 e, of
compounded verb-forms, 1082—5,
— accent in primary derivation,
1144, in secondary, 1205, m
composition, 1251, —ordinary accentuation of Skt words by Western
scholars, 96
accusative case, uses of, 269—77
with verbs, 270 274, with nouns
and adjectives, 271, 272, with prepositions, 273, 1129, with verbs
of motion and address etc , 274,
cognate, 275 , adverbial, 276, 1111,
double, 277, accus infinitive, 981,
986—8, gerund, 995, accus as
prior member of compound, 1250 a.
action-nouns and agent-nouns, chief
classes of primary derivatives, 1145,
1146
GENERA L INDEX . 541
active voice, in verbs, 528, 529.
acute (udātta) accent, 81.
ad-class of verbs — see root-class.
adjective, its distinction from noun,
322; from pple, 967; formation
of compound adj., 323-—5, 1292ff.;
inflection of adj., 321—465; comparison, 466—74; adj. pronominally inflected, 522—6.
adjective compounds,secondary,1247g,
1292—1313; of other than possessive value, 1294, 1309, 1310; adj.
copulative compounds, 1257.
adverbs, 1097—1122: adv. by derivation, 1097—1109; case-forms
used as adv., 1110—17; adverbial
compounds, 1111 d, 1313; verbal
prefixes etc. as adv., 1118—20;
inseparable prefixes, 1121; other
miscellaneous adv., 1122; adv.
used prepositionally, 1123 ff.; adv.
copulative compounds, 1259; forms
of comparison, 473 b.
agent-nouns — see action-nouns.
aggregative compounds — see copulative compounds.
alphabets used for writing Sanskrit,
1; older Indian, 2; the Devanāgarī alph., 1—17; varieties of
writing and of type for, 3, pp.
516—7;charactersandtransliteration,
5 ; arrangement, 7; theory of use,
8, 9 ; native mode of writing, 9 a, b;
modifications of this in Western
practice, 9 c—e; vowel-writing, 10;
consonant combinations, 12—15;
other signs, 11, 16; numeral figures, 17; names of characters, 18;
signs and transliteration of anusvāra, 73.
alphabet, spoken — see system of
sounds.
alterant vowels, changing following
s to ṣ, 180.
analysis oflanguage into its elements,
98, 99; anal, of compound words,
1248.
antithetical construction, its influence
on accent of verb, 596, 597.
anusvāra, its pronunciation etc.,
70—2; signs and transliteration,
73, 16b: see also ṃ, ṁ.
aorist tense, 532; its uses, 926—30 j
in prohibitive expression, 579; —
aor. system, 535, 824—930: classification of forms of aor., 824; character and occurrence, 825—7;
variety from same root, 827 b, c;
simple aor., 824, 828: I. root-aor.,
829—41; passive aor. 3d. sing.,
842- 5 ; 2. a-aor., 846—54; 3. reduplicated or causative aor., 856—
73; sibilant-aor., 874—920: 4. saor.,878—897; 5.iṣ-aor.,898—910;
6. siṣ-aor., 911—-15; 7. sa-aor.,
916—20; aor. optative or precative
of later language, 921—5; aor. in
secondary conjugation, 1019, 1035,
1046—8, 1068; periphrastic aor.,
1073 b; —s-aor. stem in derivation,
1140 c.
appositional compounds, 1280 d; appos.
possessive compounds, 1302,
ar or r in root and stem forms, 104 e,
237.'
article, indefinite, represented later
by eka, 482 c
aspirate mutes, phonetic character etc.
of, 37, 38; their deaspiration, 114,
153—5; restoration of lost aspiration to, 141a, 147, 155; not before impv, ending dhi, 155 f; derivation of h from, 66; sonant
aspirate with following t, th, 160;
non-aspirate for aspirate in reduplication, 590a: —and see the
different letters.
aspiration (h), its pronunciation etc.,
59, 65, 66: — and see h.
asseverative particles, 1122a, b.
assimilation in euphonic combination,
115—20; with or without change
of articulate position, 116; surd
and sonant, 117, 156—64; nasal,
117g, 198b, 199c; I. 117g, 206;
dental to lingual and palatal, 118;
other cases, 118—20.
augment, 585—7; ā as augment,
585 a; omission, 587; irreg. combination with initial vowel of root,
136 a; irregularly placed, 1087 c, f;
uses of augmentless preterit persons, 563, 587; with ma prohibitive, 579.
avyayībhāva compounds, 1313.
bahuvrīhi compounds — see possessive compounds,
benedictive — see precative.
bhū-class of verbs — see a-class.
cardinal numerals, 475; their combinations, 476—81; inflection, 482
542 GENERA L INDEX .
—5; construction, 486; derivatives,
487-9.
case-endings — see endings of declension.
case-forms, prolongation offinalvowel of, 248 b; used as adverbs,
1110—17; change of accent in such,
1111 g, 1112e, 1114d; their prepositional uses, 1125 d; derivatives
from case-forms, 1202 b ; case-forms
in composition, 1250.
cases, 266; their order of arrangement, 266 a; uses, 267—305: —
and see the different cases.
causative conjugation, 540, 607, 775,
856ff., 1041—52; relation to socalled tenth or cur-class, 607,
1041b; to denominative, 1041 ^
1056; formation of stem, 1041,
1042; inflection, present-system,
775, 1043; other older forms,
1044; perfect, 1045; attached reduplicated aorist, 1046, 1047,
856ff.; other aorist forms, 1048,
1049; future etc., 1050; verbal
nouns and adjectives, 1051; derivative or tertiary conjugations from
caus. stem, 1052; caus. from intens., 1025; from desid., 1039;
declinable stems from caus. stem,
1140b; double object with causatives, 277a, 282b.
cerebral mutes, 33, 45.
changeable or variable ṛ of roots —
see variable.
circumflex (svarita) accent, 81—6,
90 b; independent, 81—4; its varieties, 84; enclitic, 85; their difference, 86; designation, 87—9;
occurrence from vowel combinations,
128, 130, 135.
classes or 'series of mutes, 32ff.
classes of verbs — see conjugationclasses.
clauses, simplicity of combination of,
1131a; dependent clauses, mode
in, 581, 950; accent of verb in,
595.
collective singular form of copulative
compounds, 1253 c; in Veda, 1255 e,
1256b.
combination of elements, 100, 101:
euphonic rules for, 109—260; distinction of internal and external,
109—12; general arrangement of
rules, 124; order of comb, of three
successive vowels, 127b.
comparison of adjectives etc., 466—
74; primary, in īyas and iṣṭha,
467—70, 1184; secondary, in tara
and tama, 471—3,1242a‚b; in ra
and ma, 474, 1242 c; inflection
of comparatives in yas, 463—5;
comp. of nouns, pronouns, prepositions, 473, 474, 520, 1119; of
verbs, 473 c; double comparison,
473d; particles of comp., 1101b,
1102 e, 1107, 1122g, h.
comparison or likeness, descriptive
compounds of, 1291 a.
compensatory vowel-lengthening, 246.
composition of stems — s e e compound stems.
compound conjugation, 540 a, 1076
—95: roots with verbal prefixes and
like elements, 1076—89; accent
of comp. forms, 1082—6; irregularities, 1087; roots with inseparable
prefixes, 1089, 1121b, g, i ; with
noun and adjective stems, 1090—5.
compound stems, formation of, 101,
1246—1316: difference of earlier
and later language asto composition,
1246 a; classification of compounds,
1247; their analysis, 1248; rules
of phonetic combination, 1249; caseforms as prior member, 1250; accent, 1251; copulative comp., 1252
—61; determinative: dependent,
1262—78; descriptive, 1279—91;
secondary adjective: possessive,1292
—1308; participial, 1309; prepositional, 1310; adjective comp. as
nouns and as adverbs, 1311—3;
anomalous comp., 1314; stem-finals
altered in comp., 1315; loose construction with comp., 1316.
conditional tense, 532, 940, 941; its
uses, 950; conditional uses of optative and subjunctive, 581b, e, f.
conjugation, verbal inflection, 527—
1095; general, 527—98: voice,
528—31; tenses and their uses,
592, 776—9, 821—3, 926—30,
948—50; modes and their uses,
533, 557—82, 921—5; tense-systems, 535; present-system, 535,
599—779; perfect-system, 780—
823; aorist-systems, 824—930; future-systems, 931—50; number
and person, 536; personal endings,
541—56; verbal adjectives and
nouns, 537—9, 951—95; secondary
conjugations, 540,996—1068; peri-
GENERA L INDEX . 543
phrastic and compound conjugation,
540 a, 1069—95; examples of conjugation in synopsis, p. 520.
conjugation-classes, on what founded,
601; their characters, 602—10.
conjugations, first or non–a– and second or a-conjugation, 601—8, 733;
transfers from the former to the
latter, 625 a‚ 631a, 665 a, 670—4,
694 a, 716, 731, 896.
conjunctions, 1131—3.
consonants, pronunciation etc., 31—
75 : mutes, 32—50; semivowels,
51—8; spirants, 59—66; visarga
and anusvār a etc., 67—73; quantity, 76; cons, allowed asfinals,
122, 139—52; occurring at end of
stems and endings, 139a: — and
see the different classes and
letters.
consonant-groups, how written in devanāgarī, 9, 12—5; their extension and abbreviation, 121,
227—33.
consonantal stems, declension of, 377
—465; their classification, 382.
contemptuous prefix, 506, 1121 e; do.
suffix, 521, 1222 d.
copulative compounds, 1247 a—c,
1252—61; of nouns, 1253—6; adjectives, 1257; adverbs, 1259 ; numerals, 1261; copulatives in later
language, 1253, 1254; in Rig-Veda,
1255; in Atharva-Veda, 1256; accent, 1258; possessives fromcopulatives, 1293 b.
cur-class of verbs, 607, 775, 1041 b,
1056: — and see causative conjugation.
dative case, uses of, 285—8; dat.
infinitive, 982, 986; daf. used adverbially, 1113; dat. by attraction
with infin., 982 a; daf. as prior
member of compound, 1250 c.
deaspiration of aspirate mutes, 114,
153—5; consequent re-aspiration
of initial, 141 a, 147, 155.
declension, in general, 261—320:
gender, 263; number, 264, 265;
case, 266; uses of the cases, 267
—305; endings of decl., 306—10;
variation of stem and insertions,
311—3; accent, 314—20; — decl.
of nouns and adjectives, 321—465:
classification, 321 b, c; I. a-stems,
326—34; II. i-and u-stems, 335
—46; III. ā-,ī-, and ū (and diphthongal) stems, 347—68; IV. ṛstems, 369—76; V. consonantstems, 377—465 : A. root-stems
etc., 383—410; B. derivative stems
in as, is, us, 411—9; C. in an,
420—37; D. in i n , 438-41;
E. in ant, 442—57; F. in vans,
458—62; G. in yas, 463—5; —
decl. of numerals, 482—5; of
pronouns, 491—521; of adjectives
inflected pronominally, 522—6.
declinable stems, composition of, with
verbs, 1090—5; derivation of—
see derivation.
decompound compounds and their analysis, 1248.
decrement and increment of elements,
123, 234ff.
demonstrative pronouns, 495—503.
denominative conjugation, 540 a, 1053
—68 : formation withoutsign, 1054;
with sign ya, from stems of various
final, 1055—64; their occurrence,
1057; meaning, 1058; relation of
aya- and āya-stems‚ 1059 c; relation to causative, 1041 c, 1056,
1067; with signs sya, kāmya ,
āpaya , 1064, 1065; with āya,
beside nā-class verbs etc., 732,
1066; from other stems, 1066 a, c;
inflection, 1068; declinable stems
from denom. stem, 1068b, 1149d,
1178 h, i, 1180 d.
dental series of mutes (t, th, d, dh,
n), pronunciation etc., 33, 47,
48; peculiar quality of Skt. dentals, 47 a; dent, character of 1, 25;
of 1, 51, 53; ofs, 60; assimilation
of dent, to palatals and linguals,
118, 196—203, 205; dent, sibilant and nasal converted to lingual, 180—95; anomalous conversionsto guttural and lingual, 151a‚b;
of guttural, palatal, and labial to
dental, 151c, e: — and see the
different ietters.
dependent clause, accent of verb in,
595.
dependent compounds, 1247 d—f,
1263, 1264—78; noun, 1264; adjective, 1265; their varieties, 1266
—78: with ordinary noun or adjective asfinalmember, 1267, 1268;
with root-stem, 1269; derivative
in a, 1270; ana, 1271; ya, 1272;
participle in ta or na, 1273; t i,
544 GENERA L INDEX .
1274; in, 1275; i , 1276; van,
man, etc., 1277, 1278; dep. comp.
in possessive use, 1296.
derivation of adverbs, 1097—1109; of
declinable stems, 1136—1245: in
general, 1136—42; primary, 1143
—1201; secondary, 1202—45.
derivative or secondary conjugation —
see secondary.
descent, adjectives and nouns indicating, 1206 a.
descriptive compounds, 1247 d—f,
1263, 1279—91; of ordinary adjective with noun, 1280; of appositional noun with noun, 1280 d;
with participle as final member,
1283, 1284; with gerundive, 1285;
with root-stem, 1286; with other
verbal derivatives, 1287; with inseparable prefix as prior member,
1288; with verbal prefix etc., 1289;
with other adverbial words, 1290;
special cases, 1291; descr. comp.
in possessive use, 1297 ff.
desiderative conjugation, 540, 1026—
40; meaning, 1026, 1040; used in
future sense, 1040 a; formation of
stem, 1027—9; abbreviated stems,
1030; use of union-vowel i, 1031;
inflection, present-system, 1032;
other forms, 1033—6; derivative
or tertiary conjugations from desid.
stem, 1039; desid. from causative
stem, 1052 c; declinable stems from
desid. stem, 1035, 1036, 1140 b,
1149 d, 1159 b, 1161 d, 1178 g; desid.
root-stems, 392 d; future in desid.
sense, 949; desid. in future sense,
1040 a.
determinative compounds, 1247 d—f,
1262—91; dependent, 1264—78;
descriptive, 1279—91; in possessive
adjective use, 1293 ff.
devat ā-dvandva compounds, 1251a,
1255.
diminutives, secondary derivation of,
1206b, 1222d, 1243,.
diphthongs (e, āi, o, au), mode of
writing with consonants, 10g, h;
pronunciation etc., 27—30; protraction of. 78 c; euphonic combination
as finals, 131—5: — and see
the different letters.
diphthongal stems, declension of, 360,
361.
div- or dīv-class of verbs — see
ya-class.
double stems, present, 815; aorist,
894 d, 897 b.
doubling of aspirate mutes, 154; of
a final nasal, 210; of eh, 227 of
first consonant of a group, 229; of
a consonant after r (and h, 1, v),
228.
dual number, its use, 265; its forms
in declension, 308; in personal pronoun, 492 b.
dual finals e, ī, ū uncombinable,
138 a, g.
dvandva compounds — see copulative.
dvigu compounds, 1312.
eighth class of verbs — see u-class.
elision of initial a, 135; how marked, 16; its infrequency in Veda,
135 c; elision of initial ā, 135 d; of
final a or a, 137 b.
emphasis, accent of verb for, 598.
emphatic pronoun, 513.
enclitic or dependent circumflex, 85,
86.
endings, of inflection and derivation,
98—100; of declension, 306—10;
of singular, 307; dual, 308 ; plural,
309; normal scheme, 310; end. of
a-stems, 327—9; of i-and u-stems,
336—8; of radical ā-, ī-,ū-stems,
349; of derivative do., 363; of ṛstems, 371; of personal pronouns,
492, 493; of general pronominal
declension, 496; — end. of conjugation, 523, 541—69; of 1st
sing., 543; 2d, 544; 3d, 545; of
1st du., 546; 2d and 3d, 547; of
1st pi., 548; 2d, 549; 3d, 550;
normal schemes, 553; accent, 552
—4; end. of 2d and 3d sing, taking the place of root-final, 555 a;
union-vowels, 555 b, c; end. of
subjunctive combined with modesign, 560—2; of optative, 566; of
precative, 568; tat of imperative,
570; — end. of derivation — see
suffixes.
euphonic combination of elements, 100,
101; rules respecting it, 109—226.
exclamatory pronoun, 507; exclam.
prefix from interrogative pronoun,
506, 1121 e.
extension of cons.-groups, 227—30.
external and internal combination,
distinction of, 109—12; cases of
GENERA L INDEX . 545
external comb, in declension,llla‚b;
in derivation, 111c, d, 1203 e.
feminine stems: to ā-stems, 332,
334b; to i - and u-stems, 344—6;
to r-stems, 376 a; to cons.-stems,
378'a, 401c, 435, 436, 449, 452b,
459, 463 d; fem. in ī from yastems, 1210 c; fem. stems iu composition, 1250 h.
fifth class of verbs — see nu-class.
finals, permitted, 122, 139—52;
most usual, 149; only one final
consonant allowed, 150; exceptions, 150b, c; anomalous changes
of final mutes, 151; final consonants ofstems and endings, 139 a.
final clauses, modes used in, 581c, d.
first class of verbs — see a-class.
first or non-a-conjugation of verbs,
its characteristics, 604.
forms, stronger and weaker, of roots
and stems, 104 e, 105, 106; —
and see variation of stem.
fourth class of verbs — see yaclass.
fractional use of ordinals, 488.
frequentative conjugation — see intensive.
future passive participles — see gerundives.
future tenses, 532; their uses, 948,
949; fut. systems, 535, 931—50;
s-future and conditional, 932—41;
periphrastic future, 942—7; future
use of pres., 777; of desid., 1040 a;
desid. use of fut., 948b; fuf. participial phrases, 1075 d.
gender in declension, 262, 263.
general and special tenses, 599 a.
genitive case, uses of, 294—300:
with adj., 296; with verb, 297,
298; with prepositions, 299a, 1130;
with adverbs, 299b; gen. absolute,
300 b; loss of accent of gen. with
vocative, 314 d, e; gen. infinitive,
984; gen. used adverbially, 300 a,
1115; as prior member of compound, 1250 e.
gerunds, 539, 989—95; their uses,
989, 994; ger. in tvā, 990, 991,
993; in ya or tya, 990, 992,
993; in tvāya and tvī, 993 b;
in tvānam and tvīnam, 993 c;
adverbial gerund in am, 995.
gerundives, or future passive participles, 961—6, 1212 i, 1213, 1216
—8; ger. in ya, 962—3, 1213;
in tavya, 962, 964, 1212 i ; in
anīya, 962, 965, 1215 b; in tva,
966 a, 1209 h; in enya, 966 b,
1217; in āyya, 966 c, 1218; in
elima, 966 d, 1201a; ger. in composition, 1285.
grave (anudātta) accent, 81.
guṇa-strengthening, character and
occurrence of, 27, 235—43, and
passim; in primary derivation.
1143 a; in secondary, 1203 a, 1204 g,
guttural series of mutes (k, kh, g,
gh, n), pronunciation etc., 33,
39—41, 180 a; asserted gutf. character of a, 20 a; of h, 65 a; palatals from original gutf., 41—3;
ś and h do., 64, 66; reversion of
palatals etc. to gutt. form, 43, 64,
142, 145, 147, 214-26: — and
see the different letters.
heavy and light syllables, 79.
hiatus, avoidance of, 113, 125—38;
not avoided in Veda, 113 b, 125 c,
129 e; its occurrence as result of
euphonic processes, 132—4,175b,d,
177.
hu-olass of verbs — see reduplicating class.
imperative mode, 533, 569, 572, 575,
578; scheme of its endings, 553 d;
its 1st persons old subjunctive,
533, 574, 578; impv. form in tat
and its uses, 570, 571; with mā
prohibitive, 579 c; Vedic 2d sing,
in si, 624; impv. use of infinitives, 982 d.
imperfect, tense, 532, 599; its use,
779.
imperfect time, no real designation of,
532a.
increment and decrement of elements,
123 234ff.
indeclinables, 98 a, 1096—1135: adverbs, 1097—1122; prepositions,
1123—30; conjunctions, 1131—3;
interjections, 1134, 1135; derivative stemsfromindeclinables,1202b,
1245; compounds with indecl. as
final member, 1314 a, f.
indefinite pronouns, 513 c; indef.
use of interrogative and relative
pronouns, 507, 511.
546 GENERA L INDEX .
infinitives, 538,968—88; later, 968,
987; earlier, 969—79; uses, 980
—8; relation to ordinary verbal
nouns, 969, 970 I.
inseparable prefixes, 1121; in descriptive composition, 1283ff.,1288;
in possessive, 1304.
insertions between stem and ending
in declension, 313.
instrumental case, uses of, 278—84;
of separation, 283 a; with prepositions, 284, 1127; gerundial, 989;
used adverbially, 1112; as prior
member of compound, 1250 b.
intensive (or frequentative) conjugation, 540, 1000—25; character and
occurrence, 1000, 1001; reduplication, 1002,1003; inflection, present-system, 1004—17; derivative
middle inflection, 1016, 1017;
forms outside present-system, 1018,
1019, 1025; doubtful intens. formations, 1020—4; derivative or
tertiary conjugations from intens.
stem, 1025.
interjections, 1134, 1135; their final
vowel uncombinable, 138 f.
internal and external combination,
distinction of, 109—12.
internal change, question of derivation by, 1208i.
interrogative particles, 1122f.
interrogative pronoun, 504—7; its
indefinite »use, 507; exclamatory
prefix from it, 506, 1121j.
inverted compounds, 1291c, 1314 d.
iṣ-aorist, 824, 898—910: formation
"of stem, 898—900; inflection,
901, 902; roots making it, 903 ;
irregularities, 904; modes, 905
—8; from secondary conjugations,
1019, 1035, 1048, 1068 a.
jihvāmūlīya-spirant, 69, 170 d.
karmadhāraya compounds — see
descriptive compounds,
krī-class of verbs —-see nā-class.
labial series of mutes (p, ph, b,
bh, m), pronunciation etc., 33,
49, 50; lab. character of u, Ū,
20; of v, 51, 57, 58; anomalous
conversion of labial to guttural,
151 d; to dental, 151 e: — and
see the different letters.
lengthening of vowels in formation
and inflection, 244—6; of final
vowel in composition, 247, 1087b;
in the sentence in Veda, 248.
light and heavy syllables, 79.
lightening of a or ā to an i- or uvowel, 249 ff.
lingual series of mutes (ṭ, ṭh, ḍ, ḍh,
ṇ)‚pronunciation etc.,33,45,46; nonoriginality and ordinary derivation,
46; ling, character of ṛ, 25; of r,
51, 52; ling. I. 5 a, 54*; ling, character of s, 61; assimilation of
dentals to ling., 118, 196 ff.; lingualization of s and n, 180—95:
— and see the different letter s.
locative case, uses of, 301—5; loc.
absolute, 303 b—d; of goal of motion or action, 301 e, 304; with
prepositions, 305, 1126; used adverbially, 303 e, 1116; loc. infinitive, 985; loc. use of adverbs in
tra, 1099; in ha, 1100 a; in dā,
1103 b; loc. as prior member of
compound, 1250 d.
long and short quantity, 76—9.
manner, particles of, 1101, 1102,
1107, 1122k.
manuscripts, native Sanskrit, mode
of writing in, 9 a, b.
middle stem-form in declension, 311.
middle voice, 528—30; its use as
passive, 531, 998 c, d.
mode in verbal inflection, 533; subjunctive, 557—63; optative, 564
—8; imperative, 569—71; uses of
the modes, 572—82.
multiplicative numeral adverbs, 489 a,
1104-6.
mutes, series of, their pronunciation
etc., 32—50: classification, 32—8;
guttural series, 39—41; palatal,
42—4; lingual, 45, 46; dental, 47,
48; labial, 49, 50; assimilation,
117 a, b; mutes permitted as finals,
141—3; anomalous conversions from
one series to another, 151: — and
see the different series.
nā-class (ninth, krī-class) of verbs,
603, 717—32: formation of stem,
717; inflection, 718—26; roots of
the class, 727; irregularities, 728
—32; accompanying denominative
in āya, 732, 1066b.
GENERA L INDEX . 547
nasal assimilation, 117 c, f, g, 161,
198 b, 199 c.
nasal class (seventh, rudh-class) of
verbs, 603, 683—96: formation of
stem, 683; inflection, 684—92;
roots of the class, 694; irregularities, 693—6.
nasal increment in strong forms, 255,
386.
nasal mutes(n, ñ, ṇ, n, m), 34. 36;
their occurence as finals, 143;
duplication, 210; assimilation of
preceding mute, 161, 198b, 199b;
abbreviation of consonant-group after, 231; — nasal spirant or anusvāra, 70—3; — nasal semivowels, 71 c, 206, 213 c; — nasal
vowels, 71, 72: — and see the
different letters.
nasality, Hindu definition of, 36 a.
negative particles, 1122c—e; neg.
prefix, 1121a—c.
neutral pron. of a, 21.
ninth class of verbs — see nā-class.
nominative case, uses of, 267, 268;
peculiar construction with verbs,
268 a; with iti, 268 b; with vocative, 268 c; used adverbially,
1117; nom. use of infinitive, 987;
nom. form as particle, 1117; in
composition, 1250 i.
noun and adjective, distinction of,
322; inflection of nouns —see
declension.
nu-class (fifth, su-class) of verbs,
603, 697—716: formation of stem,
697; inflection, 698—707; roots
of the class, 708; irregularities,
710—3, 716.
number in declension, 264, 265; in
conjugation, 536; number-forms in
composition, 1250 g.
numerals, 475—89; simple cardinals,
475; their combinations for odd
numbers, 476—81; inflection, 482
—5; construction, 486 ; ordinals,
487, 488; other num. derivatives,
489, 1104—6, 1245; num. figures,
17; possessive compoundswith num.,
1300; num. or dvigu compounds,
1312.
omission, sign indicating, 16.
onomatopoetic words, 1091, 1135 b.
optative mode, 533, 564—8; its formation, 564, 565; scheme of endings combined with mode-sign,
566; precative, 567, 921—5;
scheme of prec. endings, 568; uses
of opt., 573—82; with mā prohibitive, 579 b; optative use of augmentless preterit forms, 587.
order of subjects in the grammar,
107; as best taken up by a student, 108, 112; of subjects in euph.
combination, 124.
ordinal numeral adjectives, 487, 488.
pada-endings in declension, 111a.
palatal series of mutes (c, ch, j , jh,
ñ), pronunciation etc., 33, 42—4;
derived from original gutturals, 42;
reversion to guttural form, 43,
214ff.; euphonic combinations, 118,
119, 214—20; treatment as finals,
142; assimilation of dentals to,
196—203; pal. character of i9 Ī,
20; of y, 51, 56; of ś, 63, 64;
palatal for guttural in reduplication, 590b: — and see the different letters.
participial compounds, 1247 g, 1309.
participles, 534, 537, 583, 584, 1172
—7; of present-systems, 619 etc.
etc.; of perfect, 802—7; of aorist,
840, 852, 872, 897, 909; of future,
939; passive part., 952—8, 1176,
1177; active, in tavant, navant,
959, 960; future passive, 961—6;
of secondary conjugations, 1012,
1013, 1019, 1037, 1043 e, f, 1051,
1068; part, in possessive composition, 1299; — inflection of part,
in ant, 443—9; in vans, 458—
62; — part.-phrases, periphrastic,
1074, 1075; — relation of part,
and adjective, 967.
particles, 98 a; prolongation of final
vowel of, 248 a; part, giving accent to verb, 595 c, e, 598 a.
passive conjugation, 531, 540, 998;
present-system (yá-class), 606,768
—74; aorist 3d sing., 842—5,1048;
periphrastic perfect, 1072; participle in ta or na, 952—8, 1051 b,
1176, 1177; future participles, 961
—6 (and see gerundives); pass,
use ofinfinitive, 988; pass, from
intransitives, 999 a; pass, ofsecondary conjugations, 1025, 1039,
1052 a; pass, constructions, 282 a,
999.
past use of present tense, 777, 778.
perfect tense, 532; scheme of its
35*
548 GENERA L INDEX .
endings, 553 c; uses, 821—3; —
perf.-system, 535, 780—823: formation of stem, 781—94; reduplication, 782—91; strong and weak
stem-forms, 792—4; endings and
their combination with stem, 795
—9; union-vowel i , 796—8; inflection, 800; irregularities, 801;
participle, 802—7; its inflection,
458—62; modes, 808—16; pluperfect, 817—20; — periphrastic perf.,
1070—73.
perfect time, expressed by so-called
aorist, 532 a, 825, 928; by perfect,
822, 823; by participial phrases,
107öd.
periphrastic conjugation, 540 a, 1069
—75; periph. future, 532, 931, 942
—7; its uses, 949; perfect, 1070
—3, 1018, 1034, 1045; aorist and
precative, 1073 b; present, 1073c;
periph. participial phrases, 1074,
1075.
person in verbal inflection, 536.
personal endings — see endings of
conjugation.
personal pronouns, 491—4; nouns
used as such, 514.
phrases, derivatives from, 1202b;
compounds from, 1314b.
place, particles of, 1099,1100, 1122i.
pluperfect tense, 532, 817—20; plup.
time, no designation of, 532 a;
save by participial phrases, 1075 d.
position, length of syllable by, 79.
possessive adjectives, 1206 a, 1229 b,
1230—35; pronominal, 516.
possessive compounds, 324, 1247 g,
1293—1308; poss. dependents,
1296; poss. descriptives, 1297ff.:
with ordinary adjective as prior
member, 1298; with participle,
1299; with numeral, 1300; with
appositive noun, 1301—3; with
adverb, 1304—6; added suffixes,
1212c, 1307; pregnant use, 1308.
precative optative, 533 b; its formation, 567; scheme of endings, 668;
prec. in later language, 921—5;
use, 573 c.
prepositions, 1123—30; words used
as such, 1123—5 ; cases construed
with them, 1126—30; gerunds used
as, 994 g; — prep, in composition
with roots — see verbal prefixes.
prepositional compounds, 1247g, 1310;
with added suffix, 1212 m.
present tense, 532; its uses, 777,
778; — pres.-system, 535, 599—
779: prominence as part of verbsystem, 600; varieties of form and
their classification, 601—9; various
from same root, 609; conjugations
and conjugation-classes, 602—10;
first or non-a-conjugation: I. rootclass, 611—41; II. reduplicating
class, 642—82; III. nasal class,
683—96; IV. nu- and u-class,
697—716; V. nā-class, 717—32;
second or a-conjugation, 733: VI.
a-class, 734—50; VII. accented
á-class, 751—8; VIII. ya-class,
759—67; IX. yá-class, or passive
conjugation, 768—74; so-called
cur- or tenth class, 775; uses of
tenses, 776—9; of modes, 572
—81; — pres. stems, derivatives
from, 1140 c.
present use of perfect, 821c, 823;
of aorist, 930.
presumption or conjecture, future of,
948.
primary and secondary personal endings, 542ff.; confusion of them in
use, 636 d, 933 a, 938; normal
schemes, 553.
primary derivation, 1138—1201: relation to secondary, 1139; from what
made, 1140, 1141; union-vowels,
1142; form of root, 1143; accent,
1144; meaning, 1145, 1146; prim,
suffixes and the derivatives made
with them, 1148—120I.
prohibitive expression, 574, 579, 580,
pronominal roots, 490; their character, in inflection and derivation,
1137b, 1138; adverbs from them,
1097 ff.
pronouns, 490—521: personal, 491
—4; demonstrative, 495—503;
interrogative, 504—7; relative, 508
—12; emphatic, indefinite, 513;
nouns used pronominally, 514;
pron. derivative adjectives, 515
—21; adjectives declined pronominally, 522—6.
pronunciation — see system of
sounds.
protracted (pluta) quantity, 78;
protr. final vowel uncombinable,
138e.
punctuation, signs of, in devanāgarī,
16d.
GENERA L INDEX . 549
quantity of consonants and vowels,
76—8; of syllables, 79.
r-endings of 3d pi., 550d.
radical stems — see root-stems.
reduplicated (or causative) aorist, 824,
856—73, 1046, 1047; formation
of stem, 857—63; inflection, 864
—7; use in primary conjugation,
868; in causative, 1046, 1047;
modes, 869—71.
reduplicating class (third, hu-class)
of verbs, 603, 642—82; reduplication and accent, 642—6; inflection, 647—57; roots of the class,
659; irregularities, 658, 660—82.
reduplication, occurrence of, 259;
general rules for forming, 588—90;
present red., 643, 660ff.; perfect,
782—91; aorist,857—63 -‚intensive,
1002; desiderative, 1029; in derivation, 1143 e; anomalous, 1087f.
relationship, nouns of, in r, 369ff.,
1182f.
relative clauses, peculiarities of, 512;
modes used in, 581a; accent of
verb in, 595.
relative compounds, improper name
for possessive, 1293 d.
relative pronoun, 508—12.
repeated words, 1260.
resolution, in Veda, of semivowels
into vowels, and of vowels into two
syllables, 55 a, 58a, 84c, 113b,
125c, 129e, 309f, 353a, 470b,
566 c, 761g, 771g.
reversion, so-called, of palatal mutes
and sibilant, and of h, to guttural
form, 43, 64, 66, 119, 142, 145,
147, 214 ff., 681, 787, 1028f,
1176 a.
roots, 98—100; roots of the Skf.
language, 102—5; roots and rootforms acc. to the native grammarians, 103, 104.
root-aorist, 824, 829—45: in later
language, 829; in older, 830ff.;
modes, 835—9; participles, 840;
passive aor. 3d sing., 842—6.
root-class (second, ad-class) of verbs,
603, 611—41; inflection, 612—23;
roots of the class, 625; irregularities, 624, 626—41.
root-stems, their occurrence and use,
323, 383, 1137, 1147; as infinitives, 970 a, 971; in dependent
composition, 1269; in descriptive,
1286; inflection of such stems in
ā, ī, ū, 349—361; in consonants,
383—410; sometimes govern accus.,
271 d; neut. pi. forms, 379b.
rudh-class of verbs— s e e nasal class.
s-aorist, 824, 878—97: formation of
stem, 878, 879; endings and combination with stem, 880, 881;
question of loss of s in certain
forms, 834, 881; inflection, 882;
irregularities, 884—91; absence of
ī in 2d and 3d sing, in older
language, 888—90; modes, 892
—6; participles, 897; — S-aor.
stem in derivation, 1140 c.
S-future, 931—9: formation of stem,
932, 936; use of union-vowel i ,
934, 935; occurrence, 937; modes,
938; partioiples, 939; its preterit,
the conditional, 940,941; uses, 948.
sa-aorist, 824, 916—20: roots allowed later to make it, 916; occurrence in older language, 919,
920; inflection, 917, 918.
second class of verbs — see rootclass.
second or a-conjugation of verbs, its
characteristics, 605, 733.
secondary adjective compounds, 1247g,
1292-1310.
secondary conjugations, 540, 996—
1068: passive, 998, 999; intensive, 1000—1025; desiderative
1026—40; causative, 1041—52;
denominative, 1063—68; tertiary,
or derivative from secondary, 1025,
1039, 1052.
secondary derivation, 1138, 1139,
1202—45; relation to primary,
1139; union-vowels, 1142; forms
of stem, 1203, 1204; accent, 1205;
meaning, 1206; sec. suffixes and
the derivatives made with them,
1207—45; external combination in
sec. derivation, 111c, d, 1203 e.
secondary personal endings, 542ff.;
normal scheme, 553 b.
semivowels (y, r, 1, v), pronunciation etc., 51—8; nasal semiv., 71 c,f,
206, 213 d; semiv. assimilation,
117d—f: — and see the different letters.
sentence, rules of euphonic combination in, 101; their probable artificiality, 101a.
series or classes of mutes, 32ff.
550 GENERA L INDEX .
seventh class of verbs — see nasal
class.
sh-sounds (ṣ and ś), 61, 63.
short and long quantity, 76—9.
sibilants (ś, ṣ, s), pronunciation etc.,
60—4: — and see the different
letters.
sibilant or sigmatic aorist, 824, 874—
920: formation and classification,
874—7; 4. s-aorist, 878-97; 5.
iṣ-aorist, 898—910; 6. siṣ-aorist,
911—5; 7. sa-aorist, 916—20; its
stem in derivation, 1140c.
simple aorist, 824, 828—55: 1. rootaorist, 829—41; passive aor. 3d
sing., 842—5; 2. a-aorist, 846—
55.
siṣ-aorist, 824, 911—5: formation of
stem, and inflection, 911; forms
in older language, 912, 913; modes,
914; middle forms, 915.
sixth class of verbs — see á-class‚
sonant and surd sounds, 34, 35; Hindu
definition of their difference, 34 b;
mutes, 34, 35; aspirates, 37, 38;
question as to character of h, 65 a;
of final mute, 141 b; euphonic assimilation of the two classes, 117,
156—78.
special and general tenses, 599 a.
spirants, 59ff.: sibilants, 59 — 64;
aspiration, 65; other breathings,
67—9.
stems, inflectible, 98—100, 106;
their derivation — see derivation.
strengthening and weakening processes, 234—60.
strong and weak, or strong, middle,
and weakest, forms of stems in
declension, 311; of roots and stems
in general, 104-—6; confusions of
strong and weak forms in decl.,
462c; in conj.‚556a; strong forms
in 2d sing., 723; in 2d du., 704,
831a, 839, 1007b; in 3d du.,
793h, 839; in 1st pi., 621b, 658,
676 a, 793 h, 831a, 832; in 2d pf.,
618, 621b, 654, 658, 669, 690,
704, 707, 723, 831a, 839; in 3d
pi., 793h, 831a.
su-class of verbs — see nu-class.
subjunctive mode, 533; formation and
endings, 557—62; its first persons
used later as imperative, 533, 574,
578; subj. use of augmentless preterit forms, 563, 587; uses of subj.
mode, 574—82.
suffixes, 98—100; forming adverbs,
1097—1109; do. declinable stems
— see derivation.
superlative — see comparison.
surd and sonant sounds — see sonant.
syllables, quantity of, 79; distinguished as heavy and light, 79.
system of sounds, 19—75: vowels
and diphthongs, 19—30; consonants, 31 ff.; mutes, 32—50; semivowels, 51—8; sibilants, 59—64;
aspiration, 65, 66; visarga and
other breathings, 68, 69; anusvāra, 70—3; unwritten sounds
defined by Hindu grammarians,
74, 230; scheme of spoken alphabet, with notice of comparative
frequency of the sounds, 75; quantity, 76—9; accent and its designation, 80—97.
tan-olass of verbs — see u-class.
tatpuruṣa-compounds — see determinatives.
tense in verbal inflection, 532; tensesystems, 535; present-system, 599
—779; perfect-system, 780—823;
aorist-systems, 824—930; futuresystems, 931—950.
tenth class of verbs — see causative
conjugation, and cur-class.
tertiary, or derivative from secondary,
conjugations, 1025, 1039, 1052,
1068 a.
third class of verbs — see reduplicating class.
time, particles of, 1103, 1122j.
transliteration, general method of, 5;
of sign of elision, 135 b; of combined final and initial vowels, 126 a;
of anusvāra, 73 c; of accent, 83 a,
89.
tud-class of verbs — see a-class.
u-class (eighth, tan-class) of verbs,
603, 697—716; formation of stem,
697; inflection, 698—707; roots of
the class, 709; irregular root kṛ
or kar, 714, 715; other irregularities, 716.
uncombinable (pragṛhya) final vowels, 138.
uninflected words — see indeclinables.
union-vowels, 254, 555 b, c; i in
present inflection, 630, 631, 640;
in perfect, 796—8, 803; in aorist,
GENERA L INDEX . 551
876 b, 877; in s-future, 934, 935;
in periphrastic future, 943; in
desiderative, 1031; in passive participle, 956; ‚in infinitive and gerund, 968, 991; in derivation,
1142; — ī in present inflection,
631—4; in 2d and 3d sing., 555 b;
in intensive, 1004ff.; ī for i, 900b;
āi for ī, 555 c.
upadhmānīya-spirant, 69, 170 d.
variable or changeable ṛ of roots,
242; treatment of, 245b; in passive, 770 c; in s-aor., 885; in i ṣaor., 900 b; in prec, 922a; in sfuf., 935a; in pple, 955d, 957b;
in infin., 968d; in tvā-gerund,
991b; in ya-gerund, 992a; in
desid., 1028b.
variation of stem-form in declension,
311, 312; in ṛ-stems, 370 b; in
consonantal stems, 379, 385—8,
421, 443, 444, 458, 463; — in
conjugation, 556; in present-stem,
604; in perfect, 792—4; in aorist,
831 ff., 879, 899; in intensive,
1004; in primary derivation, 1143;
in secondary, 1203, 1204; in composition, 1249 b, c.
verb — see conjugation.
verb-forms, accentuation of, in the
sentence, 92b, 591—8; prolongation of final a or i of, 248 c, d;
comparison of, 473 c, 474; comb,
with insep. prefixes, 1121b, g, i.
verbal prefixes, 1076, 1077; kindred
words, 1078, 1079, 1120; composition with roots, 1076—87, 137;
euph. effect on root, 185, 192,
1086; accent, 1082—5; their more
independent use, 1084, 1118; prepositional uses, 1125; forms of
comparison, 473b, 1119; declinable
stems from roots compounded with
them, 1141, 1282; use in descriptive composition,1281,1289; in possessive, 1305; in prepositional,
1310.
visarga (or visarjanīya), 67—9;
quantitative value, 79; occurrence,
144, 145. 170—2; alphabetic order, 7a, 172a: — and see h.
vocative case, form of, 266 a, 3Ó7k;
Vedic, in as, 425 g, 454b, 462 a,
465 a; accent (along with qualifying word), 92 a, 314; verb accented after, 594 a.
voice in verbal inflection, 528—31.
vowels, how written in devanāgarī
with consonants, 10; sign of absence of, 11; their pronunciation etc.,
19—29: a-, i -, u-vowels, 19—22;
ṛ-, 1-vowels, 23—6; diphthongs,
27—9; quantity, 77, 78; accent,
80ff,; nasal vowels, 71; rules of
vowel-combination, 125—38; resulting accent, 128, 130, 135 a;
exceptional cases, 136—8.
vṛddhi-strengthening, character and
occurrence of, 27, 235—43, and
passim; in primary derivation,
1143 a; in secondary, 1204.
w-sound, belonging to v, 57.
weak, or weakest, form of stem in
declension, 311.
weakening and strengthening processes, 234—60.
writing in India, 2a; mode of, in
Skf. manuscripts, 9 a, b; its modifications in western practice, 9 c—e.
ya-class (fourth, div-class) of verbs,
606, 759—67: formation of stem,
759; inflection, 760; roots of the
class and their classification, 761,
762; irregularities, 763—7.
yá-class of verbs, or passive presentsystem, 606, 768—74; formation
of stem, 768—70; inflection, 771;
irregularities, 772—4; yá-formation from intensive stem, 1016
1017.
ERRATA .
A few entirely obvious misprints are passed without notice.
p. 5, 10c‚ lastl. — for SfJ read
42, 125 b, I. 3 — for (for prayuga) » (for prayuga?),
67, 199 c, 1. 3--for IB. » JB.
92, 276 a, 1. 2 — for leagues » leagues.
94, 281b, 1. 4 — read 'kṣahṛdayaṁ dātā rājā 'śvahṛ-.
99, 296 b, 1. 10 — for deceiving read deceiving.
297 b, I. 5 — » mpart » impart.
100, I. 2 » preceive » perceive.
112, 324, I. 4 — » prajā́kāmá » prajākāmá.
128, margin —- » 356-] » 354-].
131, 361 e, 1. 6-— » 314 » 314b.
f, 1.4 — » borhugú(f. -gū́,JB.) » bahugú (f. -gū́, TB.).
144, 383k. 1,1. 3 — » n » in
147, 391 f, I. 1 — » milki » milking.
148, 391 g, I. 2 — » śā́mam » -śā́mam.
169, 458, l. 5 — » i » is.
195, 509, 1. 8 (accus. sing, masc.) for y ām » yám.
209, 555 a, last I. — for urther » further.
213, 568, 1.7 — » īḍhvam » īḍhvám.
261, 718, 1. 7 (3d pi. mid.) for shìUIM » WtW!
263, 731, 1. 3 — for √mi » √nn.
264, 733a, I. 4 — for -systems » -stems.
281, 785 a, 1. 2 — » dyu » dyut.
•355, 990 a, 1. 9 — » E. » S.
357, 992 c, 1. 2 — » gúhya » guhya.
379, 1042 b, \. 11 — read No forms made without strengthening have a
causative value in the older language.
383, 1045, 1. 6 — for rfCR read
396, 1077, 1. 10 — » abhi » abhI.
397, 1079, 1. 6 — read the sound hing, low, murmur.
399, 1084 a, 1. 4 — for ā́rūhat read ā́ruhat.
431, 1155e, 1. 3.— » -amri » -mamri.
467,1222c,1.7— » 516d » 516b.
472, 1230g, 1. 3 — » ike » like.
477, 1238 b, I. 2— » cases-forms » case-forms.
500, 1288g, 1.1 — » sa » sa.
511, 1308 a, I. 1 — » ukhānṛtam » uktānṛtam.