Colloquial


Hindi
The Colloquial Series
The following languages are available in the Colloquial series:

Afrikaans                German                 Romanian
Albanian                 Greek                  Russian
Amharic                  Gujarati               Scottish Gaelic
Arabic (Levantine)       Hebrew                 Serbian
Arabic of Egypt          Hindi                  Slovak
Arabic of the Gulf and   Hungarian              Slovene
   Saudi Arabia          Icelandic              Somali
Basque                   Indonesian             Spanish
Breton                   Irish (forthcoming)    Spanish of Latin
Bulgarian                Italian                   America
Cambodian                Japanese               Swahili
Cantonese                Korean                 Swedish
Catalan                  Latvian                Tamil
Chinese                  Lithuanian             Thai
Croatian                 Malay                  Turkish
Czech                    Mongolian              Ukrainian
Danish                   Norwegian              Urdu
Dutch                    Panjabi                Vietnamese
English                  Persian                Welsh
Estonian                 Polish                 Yoruba
Finnish                  Portuguese
French                   Portuguese of Brazil

COLLOQUIAL 2s Series
The Next Step in Language Learning
Chinese                  Italian                Spanish
Dutch                    Portuguese of Brazil   Spanish of Latin
French                      (forthcoming)         America
German (forthcoming)     Russian
All these Colloquials are available in book and CD packs, or sold
separately. You can order them from http://www.routledge.com or
from your bookseller.
Colloquial
Hindi
The Complete Course
for Beginners

Tej K. Bhatia
First published 1996
by Routledge
This edition first published 2008
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2008 Tej K. Bhatia
Typeset in 10/12 pt Times by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong



All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bhatia, Tej K.
  Colloquial Hindi : a complete course for beginners /
  Tej K. Bhatia. – [2nd, rev. ed.].
       p. cm.
    Previously published: 1996.
    Includes index.
  1. Hindi language – Textbooks for foreign speakers – English. 2. Hindi
  language – Conversation and phrase books – English. 3. Hindi language
  – Grammar. I. Title.
  PK1935.B525 2007
  491′. 4382421–dc22                                           2007001478

ISBN10: 0–415–41956–5 (pbk)
ISBN10: 0–415–39528–3 (audio CDs)
ISBN10: 0–415–39527–5 (pack)

ISBN13: 978–0–415–41956–7 (pbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–39528–1 (audio CDs)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–39527–4 (pack)
ISBN13: 978–1–315–74137–6 (eBook Pack)
              In memory of
my mother, Shrimati Krishna Wanti Bhatia
                   and
   my father, Shri Parma Nand Bhatia
Contents

Preface                                   ix
Acknowledgements                         xi
Introduction                               1
Hindi writing system and pronunciation     9
Transcription table                      24

ilaip AaOr laoKna                        27
Script and handwriting
 1 phlaa paz – ilaip                     29
   Script unit 1
 2 dUsara paz – ilaip                    34
   Script unit 2
 3 tIsara paz – ilaip                    41
   Script unit 3
 4 caaOqaa paz – ilaip                   46
   Script unit 4
 5 paácavaaá paz – ilaip                 53
   Script unit 5

Paaz                                     63
Units
 1 namasto/ namaskar.                    65
   namaste/namaskar
   Greetings and social etiquette
 2 Aap khaá ko/ kI hOMÆ                  81
   Where are you from?
viii                                              Contents


        3 Aapkao @yaa caaiheÆ                          98
          apko kya cahiye?
          What would you like?
        4 Aapko SaaOk @yaa hOMÆ                       117
          ap ke shauk kya hq?
          What are your hobbies?
        5 Cui+yaaoM maoM @yaa kroMgaoÆ                138
          chuTTiyõ mg kya kargge?
          What will you do during the break?
        6 kla @yaa ikyaaÆ                             157
          kal kya kiya?
          What did you do yesterday?
        7 @yaa Aap ihndI baaola sakto hOMÆ            175
          kya ap hindc bol sakte hq?
          Can you speak Hindi?
        8 mauJao caOk kOSa krvaanao hOM.              199
          mujhe cheque cash karvane hq
          I need to get cheques cashed
        9 facaU-na kukI maoM @yaa ilaKa hOÆ           221
          ‘fortune cookies’ mg kya likha hs?
          What’s written in the fortune cookie?
       10 BaartIya %yaaOhar.                          243
          bharatiya tyauhara
          Indian festivals


       Reference grammar                              259
       Key to exercises                               285
       Dictionary order                               308
       English–Hindi glossary                         309
       Hindi–English glossary                         328
       Index                                          343
Preface


Since the publication of this book over a decade ago, it has under-
gone several reprints. Nothing is more gratifying for an author than
to hear from his/her readers. I consider myself privileged to be the
beneficiary of my readers’ reactions, suggestions, compliments and
wish-lists which poured in from a highly diverse cross-section of
readers around the globe. This encouraged me to create a revised
and expanded version of the book. Based on the input that I have
received, I know it is not the ideal solution to the multitudes of
topics (ranging from the treatment of the Hindi script, grammatical
details and cross-cultural insights) that one wishes to address; how-
ever, it is a modest step toward that goal.
   Many changes have occurred since the first publication of the
book. India is fast becoming a major global power. The dynamics
of communicative situations further call for changes to reflect new
situations and realities. Readers will find the following new changes
and additions in this book:

• Facts and figures have been updated.
• The section dealing with the script has been beefed up considerably.
• Dialogues and prose texts integrate the Roman as well as the
  Devanagari in a way that reflects a mutually-feeding relationship
  between the two. As one of the anonymous reviewers of the book
  rightly noted, the execution of the Devanagari version of conversa-
  tions and prose texts was cumbersome in the first edition. This
  limitation has been addressed.
• Roman is a non-syllabic script whereas Devanagari is syllabic.
  Whenever relevant, the complementary strengths of the two writing
  systems are exploited, particularly in explanations of grammar.
• While the new guidelines issued by the Government of India
  have been followed throughout the book (e.g. the letter jha; pref-
  erence for e instead of ye in words such as cahie; not separating
  the postpositions with the pronouns), readers are also exposed to
x                                                                  Preface


        variation (e.g. two ways of writing the third person singular,
        polite imperative forms and the past tense).
    •   Whenever relevant, the content has been modernized.
    •   New topics of cross-cultural communication have been introduced
        in the cultural notes (e.g. how to say ‘no’ in socially sensitive
        situations, linguistic attitudes and hyper-politeness, etiquettes of
        gift-giving).
    •   Another innovation is the Online Resource Guide and the Internet
        links.
    •   Old errors and misprints have been corrected.

    In spite of this, I am acutely aware that this work is not free from
    limitations. Therefore, I would be grateful for any comments, criti-
    cisms or suggestions that perceptive scholars may have on this book.
    Please send them to me at the following address: Linguistic Studies
    Program, 312 HBC, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York-13244-
    1160, USA or send an email to: tkbhatia@syr.edu.
Acknowledgements


I am especially indebted to Sophie Oliver, Senior Editor, Language
Learning, for agreeing to consider and produce the new and revised
version of this book and for her commendable patience and encour-
agement. I am equally indebted to three anonymous reviewers for
their constructive and insightful input.
    I have contracted many debts in the process of writing this
book and its earlier edition. I am also grateful to my teachers
and colleagues, Yamuna and Braj Kachru who have taught me and
influenced me since my graduate school. I am also indebted to my
friends and colleagues Rajeshwari Pandharipande, James W. Gair,
Hans Hock, Meena and S.N. Sridhar, Rakesh Bhatt, Rajesh
Kumar, William C. Ritchie, Jaklin Kornfilt, Jennifer L. Smith, Vasu
Reganathan, Afroz Taj, Amer Bridger, Cassidy Perraeault and
Dr Mangat R. Bhardwaj, the author of the companion volume on
Punjabi, for their valuable discussions on matters of Hindi teach-
ing and linguistics. Finally, I also owe my thanks to Dr P.R.
Mehandiratta (Director General, American Institute of Indian
Studies, New Delhi) and to my colleagues at the South Asia Center,
Ann Gold, Jishnu Shankar and Susan Wadley, for their comments,
support and encouragement.
    My mother passed away before the first edition of this book
became a reality. This has left a permanent vacuum in my life. My
family migrated from the North West Frontier province close to the
Pakistan and Afghanistan border, so Hindi was my mother’s third
language and according to the value system of that time she never
had any formal schooling. During the writing of this book I remem-
bered how at the insistence of her children she learned to sign her
name in Hindi instead of using a thumb print as a signature. It is
still a mystery to me how and when she learned to read the Gita in
Hindi. I had thought there would still be a lot of time for us and that
these questions were not urgent. I was wrong. This work is especi-
ally dedicated to her memory.
xii                                                Acknowledgements


          I owe special thanks to my wife, Shobha, for her encouragement
      and support and to my daughter, Kanika, and my son, Ankit, who
      first inspired me to write this book so that they could learn Hindi.
      My special thanks are also due to my niece, Nandita. No words can
      express my deepest appreciation of my brothers in India for their
      constant support during my entire career.
          The pictures produced in this book were taken by the author as
      part of the ongoing collaborative project, Hindi OnLine, between
      Syracuse University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-
      Champaign and the University of Texas at Austin. The project is
      funded by a grant from the South Asia Research Center (SALRC),
      the University of Chicago and the US Department of Education.
      I gratefully acknowledge the support of Dr Steven M. Poulos,
      Director, SALRC, for making this work possible.
          My heartfelt thanks are also due to: Professor Omkar Koul for
      his technical assistance in the preparation of the manuscript and
      his perceptive comments; and to the College of Arts and Sciences’
      Dean Cathryn R. Newton, Associate Dean Dr Gerold Greeenberg
      and Dr Ben Ware, Vice President, Research and Computing, for
      their support of this work.
Introduction                                                                  1




BaUimaka
b humika
Introduction




A word to the learner
Welcome to Colloquial Hindi. Very often at social get-togethers in
the West, I am asked with utmost sincerity whether or not I speak
Hindu. Although I have no difficulty in understanding the real
intent of the question, unwittingly I find myself in an embarrassing
situation. This is particularly true if this inquiry happens to come
directly from my host. You see, Hindu is the name of the predomin-
ant religion in India and Nepal; Hindi is the name of the language
that is the lingua franca of South Asia.


About the language
Hindi is a modern Indo-Aryan language spoken in South Asian
countries (India, Pakistan, Nepal) and also in other countries out-
side Asia (Mauritius, Trinidad, Fiji, Surinam, Guyana, South Africa
and other countries). Approximately eight hundred million people
speak Hindi, as either a first (480 million) or second language. It is
the second most widely spoken language in the world. Along with
English, it is the official language of India. In addition, it is the state
language of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jarkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Also, I
should point out that Hindi is the language of Agra (the city of the
Taj Mahal).
   Hindi, which is a descendant of the Sanskrit language, is not
strictly the name of any chief dialect of the area but is an adjective,
Persian in origin, meaning Indian. Historically, it was synonymous
with Hindui, Hindawi, Rexta and Rexti. The terms Urdu and
Hindustani are also used to refer to this language. All these labels
2                                                               Introduction


    denote a mixed speech spoken around the area of Delhi, North India,
    which gained currency during the twelfth and thirteenth century as a
    contact language between the Arabs, Afghans, Persian and Turks,
    and native residents.
        Hindi is written in the Devanagari script which is ranked as the
    most scientific writing system among the existing writing systems
    of the world. The Devanagari script is written from left to right and
    is a descendant of the Brahmi script which was well established in
    India before 500 BC. The script is phonetic in nature and there is
    a fairly regular correspondence between the letters and their pro-
    nunciation. For more details see the section on the Hindi writing
    system and pronunciation.
        The literary history of Hindi goes back to the twelfth century.
    Some notable literary figures of Hindi are Kabir, Surdas and Tulsidas.
    The two notable linguistic features of the language are as follows:
    (1) Hindi still retains the original Indo-European (1500 BC) distinc-
    tion between aspirated and unaspirated consonants which results in
    a four-way contrast as shown by the following examples: kAl, ‘time’,
    k hAl, ‘skin’, gAl, ‘cheek’ and g hAl, ‘to put into’; (2) it has the feature
    of retroflexion in its consonant inventory, cf. TAl, ‘to put off’ and
    tAl, ‘pond’. The retroflex consonant is transcribed as the capital T.
    For more details see the section on the Hindi writing system and
    pronunciation.
        Hindi has an approximately three-century-old, well-attested and
    rich grammatical tradition of its own. It is a by-product of the colo-
    nial era and was born shortly after the arrival of Europeans in India.
    For a detailed treatment of this topic in general and the grammatical
    tradition in particular, see Bhatia (1987).


    About this book
    This book is designed as a complete first-year language course,
    keeping in mind the proficiency guidelines of the American Council
    on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) and the Euro-
    pean Language Community. Every attempt is made to optimize this
    goal by integrating the linguistic content with the culture of South
    Asia in general and India in particular. In fact, while teaching the
    language I have attempted to answer those questions that are often
    asked about the culture of India.
       In my professional life I have often witnessed the fact that
    the teaching of non-Western languages, including Hindi, is more
Introduction                                                              3


challenging in the West than the teaching of Western languages.
If you have experienced any of the following problems, this book
will enable you to achieve the goals described above:

• You sweat at the mere thought of learning a foreign language
  and/or foreign script.
• You think Hindi is a very difficult language to learn, so why
  try?
• You have some serious business, research interests or not-so-
  serious interests (such as travel) in India but you have been led
  to believe that everybody in India speaks English.
• You have learned Hindi from tools and settings which make
  native speakers laugh secretly or openly at your language use.
• India is culturally and linguistically so distant from the West that
  one cannot help but shy away from it.
• You haven’t heard of Bollywood movies.
• You consider French the only language fit for romance.

If you subscribe to one or all of the above, you are in for a surprise.
First, you might discover in the process of learning the language
that learning about Hindi is learning about one’s own roots. The
only difference is that European migration to India is perhaps the
oldest of all migrations from Europe, or vice versa as shown by recent
DNA research. For this reason, you will still find some striking
similarities between Hindi and English. For example, the Hindi word
for English ‘name’ is nam. The list goes on and on. The important
thing to know is that Hindi belongs to the Indo-European language
family and is similar to English in a number of ways. Learning to
note these similarities will make the process of learning this lan-
guage full of pleasant surprises.
   The book is grounded in the current theories of language acquisi-
tion, learnability and language use. Unlike other books (even some
of the latest ones), it never loses sight of the social–psychological
aspects of language use. In this book, I have not attempted to act
like a protector or saviour of language by engaging in linguistic
prescriptivism and puritanism. What you will find in this book is
how Hindi speakers use Hindi and communicate with each other in
meaningful ways. No attempt is made to translate the English word
artificially into Hindi if Hindi speakers treat the English word like
any other Hindi word. I was outraged when I noticed in a widely
circulated course on Hindi in which the waiter asks his customers
for their order, the word ‘order’ translated using the same verb as
4                                                             Introduction


    the English ‘obey my order!’ For more details see the section entitled
    ‘English Prohibition?’ in Unit 2.


    Beware . . .
    These prescriptivist tendencies defeat the real goal of learning a
    language in order to communicate with native speakers. Even some
    of the latest books on Hindi suffer from such problems and un-
    wittingly do a disservice to their learners because of their authors’
    lack of familiarity with the social–psychological dimensions of lan-
    guage use. I came across some examples in one of the most recent
    books on Hindi which teaches learners how to introduce themselves
    to native speakers. The sentences are grammatically correct but
    the author(s) fail to take into account the invisible dimension of
    the phenomenon of ‘turn taking’. For example, it is acceptable for
    English speakers to introduce themselves with a string of two clauses
    following the word ‘Hi’ (e.g. ‘Hi, my name is John and what is
    yours?’). However, the Hindi speaker will pause after the Hindi
    equivalent of ‘Hi’ and wait for the listener to respond with a greet-
    ing, and only after that will the Hindi speaker perform the task of
    telling his name and asking about his listener’s name. The failure
    to teach learners about ‘turn taking’ through naturalistic conversa-
    tions makes them run the risk of being seen as ‘pushy’ or ‘impatient’
    by native speakers. This book is particularly aware of such ‘non-
    linguistic’ or invisible dimensions of language use. Therefore, this
    book never loses sight of cross-cultural communication while teaching
    linguistic communication.
        This book deals with the four main linguistic skills:


                     receptive                       productive

    Aural–oral       listening comprehension         speaking comprehension
    Visual           reading comprehension           writing comprehension


    These skills are introduced in a manner consistent with the insights
    of modern Chomskyan linguistics. The learners are exposed to
    rules and discovery procedures, similar to those employed by native
    speakers, which enable them to generate an infinite number of sen-
    tences in their native language. Not only that, these rules enable native
Introduction                                                              5


speakers to generate new sentences they have never encountered
before (see Bhatia and Ritchie 2006 for details). This is the concep-
tual framework, combined with my twenty-five years of classroom
experience, which has gone into the makeup of this book. Unlike
other phrasebooks which emphasize parroting sentences without
gaining insight into the linguistic system, this book emphasizes and
serves as a catalyst to promote linguistic creativity and optimization.
This goal is achieved in a simple and unpretentious way avoiding
system overload.


How this book is organized
This book attempts to accommodate two types of learners: (1) those
who want to learn the language through the Hindi script called the
Devanagari script; and (2) those who wish to learn the language in
a relatively short period of time without the aid of the Devanagari
writing system (henceforth, Hindi script). Such pragmatic considera-
tions are an important feature of this book.
   The book begins with Hindi script and pronunciation. The main
body deals with ten conversational units which consist of the follow-
ing parts: (1) vocabulary; (2) dialogues with English translation;
(3) notes detailing pronunciation, grammar and usage relating to
the unit; and (4) exercises. The dialogues with ‘Tell me why?’ and
humour columns together with the notes explicitly deal with those
aspects of Indian culture about which I am most often asked. The
vocabulary or the new words used in the dialogues are given in
English and Devanagari script. You may wish to consult the voca-
bulary sections while doing exercises.
   The grammar summary gives an overview of the Hindi grammat-
ical tradition with full paradigms. This section complements the
section ‘Notes and grammar’ given in each lesson.
   The vocabulary section gives all the Hindi words used in the
dialogues. The words are listed alphabetically both in Hindi and
English. The basic vocabulary section classifies Hindi words into
different semantic groups.


How to use this book
This book focuses on two types of track: (1) for those learners who
want to adopt the English script path; and (2) for those who want
6                                                           Introduction


    to learn the Hindi script. Although learning Hindi script is highly
    recommended, if you decide to choose the first track, you can bypass
    the lessons on the writing system. For every learner, on both tracks,
    the lesson on the ‘Hindi writing system and pronunciation’ is a must
    and familiarity with the salient phonetic features of Hindi together
    with the ‘Transcription table’ is imperative. Please make sure that
    you learn the transcription of conversations, which differs from media
    convention. As shown in the transcription table, media convention
    is often broad and unsystematic. Examples of pronunciation are
    also recorded on the CD. The exercises with the audio icon are
    recorded on the CD. If you wish, you can refer to the listening
    exercises transcripts at the end of the book.
       If you are on the Hindi script track, you should start from script
    unit 1: you will learn Devanagari script in its printed as well as its
    handwritten form. Conversations and keys are given in Roman as
    well as in Hindi script. While working on the script units, you can
    make a start on the conversation units. There is an added incent-
    ive to consult the script units: their exercise sections give some of
    the most common expressions any visitor to India may need. They
    deal with situations such as customs and immigration, baggage, read-
    ing weather charts, making reservations, sending mail, gift-giving,
    annoying and cautionary settings, shopping, food, entertainment and
    renting.
       Naturally, you will need to memorize the vocabulary. The notes
    sections give you help on pronunciation, grammar and usage. Read-
    ing and learning these notes will stimulate your linguistic creativity.
       The reference grammar goes hand in hand with the grammatical
    notes given at the end of each dialogue. Answers to the exercises
    can be found in the key to exercises, in both Hindi and English
    scripts.


    Icons used in this book

    Icons are used throughout this book for several reasons, the most
    important of which is to draw attention to those sections that
    require careful reading.

    Audio Symbol        This symbol means that the corresponding exer-
                        cise requires the use of the CD that accompanies
                        this course.
Introduction                                                               7


Magic Key            Information next to this icon is critical for cre-
                     ativity and is worth memorizing.



Sherlock Holmes      This icon appears next to important examples
                     of regular usage, the understanding of which is
                     a primary source of creativity for the native
                     speakers.
Remember             This icon reminds you of material covered earlier.




Caution              The material marked by this icon deserves special
                     attention. It warns you about common mistakes
                     and sources of misunderstanding.


Web links            For additional practice or materials, web links
                     are provided.



The other icons used in the book are thematic in nature and should
prove self-explanatory.


Where to go from here
Of course, I do not pretend to teach you everything that needs to be
known about Hindi. Language learning can be a life-long venture if
you set your goals very high. Your next step is to look for books
offering the intermediate and advanced Hindi courses listed at the
end of the book. I give this information to alleviate the misconcep-
tion, quite widespread in the West, that there is a lack of inter-
mediate and advanced-level courses in Asian and African languages.
There is no shortage of material, in print or on the web, at these
levels. The only difficulty you might face is that this material will
invariably be in Hindi script. If that poses a problem for you, there
are still many ways you can continue to sharpen your linguistic
skills, the most important of which is Hindi films. India is the world’s
largest producer of films which are widely accessible in the East and
8                                                         Introduction


    the West on video and DVD. To develop a taste for Hindi films is
    most important in taking you to advanced Hindi language learning.
       Readers will find the following web resources useful. Please re-
    member, however, that the links may not always be active and that
    the content may change. The following links were active at the time
    of writing:

      http://www.latrobe.edu.au/indiangallery/hin11.htm
      http://www.ncsu.edu/project/hindi_lessons/

       Due to limitations of space, detailed descriptions of monuments
    such as the Taj Mahal could not be included in this book; for the
    sight and sounds of Indian monuments, lessons 2 and 9 from the
    www.ncsu.edu website are particularly recommended.

    For intermediate and advance readings, the following sites deserve
    attention:

      http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/plc/hindi/video/
      http://lrrc3.sas.upenn.edu/hindi_unicode/
      http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/Hindi/hindi.html
      http://munshi-premchand.blogspot.com/
      http://www.abhivyakti-hindi.org/
      http://www.anubhuti-hindi.org/

    Newspaper and media sites:

      http://www.bbc.co.uk/hindi/
      http://www.naidunia.com/

    Collection of Indian Newspaper sites:

      http://www.indiapress.org/index.php/Hindi/400x60

    Best wishes.


    Reference
    Bhatia, Tej K. 1987. A History of the Hindi Grammatical Tradition.
      Leiden: E.J. Brill.
    Bhatia, Tej K. and William C. Ritchie. 2006. Handbook of Bilingu-
      alism. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                     9




ihndI laoKna AaOr ]ccaarNa
hindc lekhan aur
uccaraN
Hindi writing system and
pronunciation




Introduction              (CD 1; 2)

This chapter briefly outlines the salient properties of Devanagari
script and Hindi pronunciation. Hindi is written in Devanagari script.
Even if you are not learning the script, this chapter is indispensable
because you need to know the pronunciation values of the Roman/
English letters used in the conversational units. Also, one or two
unfamiliar symbols are drawn from the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA). The transcription scheme followed here is widely
used in the teaching of Hindi and in Hindi language, literature and
linguistics. As I have said, the best way to learn Hindi is to learn the
script as well. However, if this is not possible due to consideration of
time, you will still need to refer to the transcription table until you
have mastered the letters and their pronunciation value.
   Listen to and repeat the pronunciation of Hindi vowels and con-
sonants together with their minimal pairs, recorded on the CD
accompanying this book.


Devanagari script
A number of languages are written in Devanagari script. Besides
Hindi, Nepali, Marathi and Sanskrit are also written in this script.
Other languages such as Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati use a slight vari-
ation of this script. This means that roughly half of humanity use
10                              Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     either this script or its close variant which follows the same under-
     lying organizational system.
         All scripts of Indic origin, including Devanagari script, are de-
     scendants of the Brahmi script which was well established some time
     before 500 BC in India. These scripts are considered the most scien-
     tific among the existing writing systems of the world for a number
     of reasons. (1) The arrangement and classification of the letters or
     symbols follow a system based on physiological or phonetic prin-
     ciples, namely the point and manner of articulation. Other writing
     systems, including the Roman system, employ arbitrary, random
     criteria to arrange and categorize the letters. (2) Each letter repres-
     ents one sound only (at least in most cases). For example, in English
     the [k] sound can be represented by the letters k, q, c and ch. This
     does not happen in Devanagari. Because of its scientific and pho-
     netic nature, this script has become the foundation of modern speech
     science and the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA.) The IPA is
     basically the romanized version of Devanagari script. As a result
     there is fairly regular correspondence between script and pronuncia-
     tion. In other words, the words are pronounced as they are written,
     and that is good news for our learners.
         Devanagari script is written from left to right and from the top of
     the page down, like Roman script. It does not distinguish between
     upper-case and the lower-case letters. It is syllabic in nature, i.e.
     every consonant letter/symbol represents the consonant plus the
     inherent vowel A a. The pronunciation of the inherent vowel is the
     major exception to the rule of correspondence between script and
     pronunciation. These exceptions are detailed in script unit 1 and script
     unit 4. Other minor exceptions are indicated by angular brackets < >
     with the words listed in the vocabulary of each unit.
         Below you will find Hindi vowel and consonant charts. In
     Devanagari vowels and consonants are listed separately because they
     involve distinct articulations.


     Hindi vowels
     Independent forms

       A      Aa     [     [-      ]     }     e     eo     Aao    AaO    ?
       a      a      i     c       u     e     e     s      o      au     ri
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                        11


Dependent forms: following a consonant

  ø      a       i        I       u        U       o       O   ao   aO    R
  a      a       i        c       u    e           e   s       o    au   ri

Notes on Hindi vowels

Hindi vowels do not distinguish between capital and non-capital.
However, they do distinguish between independent and dependent
forms. The independent forms are often called ‘the main’ or ‘full’
vowels, whereas the corresponding dependent forms are called
‘matra’ vowels and are connected to the preceding consonant.

Nasalization

In the production of a nasal vowel, a vowel is pronounced through
the mouth and the nose at the same time. Using either the symbol á
or M with the vowel indicates nasalization in Hindi. Long vowels are
usually nasalized in Hindi. In our transcription, the tilde symbol ˜
is used to indicate vowel nasalization, as in

  Aaá        k       }á       o       eá       q

The symbol M is used to indicate vowel nasalization when any stroke
of the vowel crosses the top horizontal line, as in eoM.

Diphthongs

eo s and AaO au are pronounced as a + i and a + u in the Eastern
variety of Hindi, but are pronounced as single vowels in Standard
Hindi. They receive dipthongal pronunciation only if they are fol-
lowed by y and w/v, respectively.
   ? ri does not occur in Hindi. It is used in the writing of a handful
of words which are borrowed by Hindi from Sanskrit.
12                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Hindi consonants

                Voiceless      Voiceless   Voiced        Voiced      Nasal
                unaspirated    aspirated   unaspirated   aspirated

     k-group    k              K           ga            Ga          =
                ka             kha         ga            gha         ra
     c-group    ca             C           ja            Ja          Ha
                ca             cha         ja            jh a        ña
     T-group    T              z           D             Z           Na
                Ta             Th a        Da            Dha         Na
     t-group    t              qa          d             Qa          na
                ta             th a        da            dha         na
     p-group    p              f           ba            Ba          ma
                pa             Ph a        ba            bha         ma
     Others     ya             r           la            va          Sa
                ya             ra          la            wa/va       sha
                Ya             sa          h
                SHa            sa          ha
                D,             Z,
                Ra             Rha


     Sanskrit letters used infrequently:   xa ksha ~ tra & gya

     Notes on Hindi consonants

     The first five groups of consonants are called stops because they are
     pronounced by stopping outgoing air from the mouth. The fifth
     column of these five groups of consonants is called nasal because the
     air is released through the nose while it is stopped from the mouth.
     The nasal consonants of the first two groups, i.e. = ra and Ha ña are
     never used in their syllabic form in Hindi, so you will not find them
     in this book. They are included here because they are part of the
     traditional Devanagari consonant chart.

     Place of articulation

     All consonants arranged within each of the five groups share the
     same place of articulation, as described below:
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                   13


k-vaga- k-group
These consonants are also called ‘velar’ because the back of the
tongue touches the back of the soft palate, called the velum. They
are similar to the English k and g.

  k       K        ga     Ga       =
  ka      kha      ga     gha      ra

ca-vaga- c-group
These sounds are the closest equivalent to the English sound ch in
‘church.’ The main body of the tongue touches the hard palate in
the articulation of these sounds.

  ca      C        ja     Ja       Ha
  ca      cha      ja     jha      ña

T-vaga- T-group (the ‘capital T group’)
  T       z        D      Z        Na
  Ta      Tha      Da     Dha      Na

These consonants represent the most colourful features of the lan-
guages of the Indian subcontinent. They are also called ‘retroflex’
consonants. There is no equivalent of these sounds in English. In the
articulation of these sounds, the tip of the tongue is curled back and
the underside of the tongue touches the hard palate. The following
diagram can help in the production of these sounds:




Note that D, R and Z, Rh are also pronounced with the same point of
articulation.
14                               Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     t-vaga- t-group
     The tip of the tongue touches the back of the teeth, and not the gum
     ridge behind the teeth as is the case in the pronunciation of the
     English t or d.

       t      qa        d        Qa      na
       ta     th a      da       dha     na

     Study the following diagrams carefully in order to distinguish Hindi
     t-group of sounds from the English t-group of sounds.




                     English                           Hindi


     p-vaga- p-group
     These sounds are similar to English p or b sounds. They are pro-
     nounced by closing or nearly closing the lips.

       p       f            ba     Ba         ma
       pa      pha          ba     bha        ma

     Manner of articulation

     All columns in the five groups involve the same manner of articulation.

     Voiceless unaspirated

       k       ca       T         t      p
       ka      ca       Ta        ta     pa
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                      15


These sounds are like the English k (as in ‘skin’ but not as in ‘kin’),
p (as in ‘spin’ but not as in ‘pin’). In ‘kin’ and ‘pin’, the English
sounds k and p are slightly aspirated, i.e. they are followed by a
slight ‘puff of air’. In order to pronounce the corresponding Hindi k
and p, you need to reduce the flow of breath.

Voiceless aspirated

   K       C         z          qa          f
   kha     cha       Tha        tha         pha

The superscripted h means that these sounds are pronounced with a
strong ‘puff of air’. All you have to do is to increase the air flow
slightly in the pronunciation of the English k and p sounds.

Voiced unaspirated

   ga     ja     D         d          ba
   ga     ja     Da        da         ba

In the production of these sounds the vocal cords vibrate and
produce a buzzing sound, like that of a bee. You should have no
difficulty producing these sounds as they are like English g and b.

Voiced aspirated (breathy voiced)

If you pronounce voiced unaspirated consonants with a ‘puff of
air’, you will produce voiced aspirated sounds. The superscripted h
indicates the presence of the ‘puff of air’. If this seems difficult, try
pronouncing the voiced unaspirated consonants with an h (as in
hog-hog). If you pronounce the words fast enough, you will obtain
the voiced aspirate g h at the end of the first break between the two
words.

   Ga      Ja        Z          Qa          Ba
   gha     jha       Dha        dha         bha

Nasal

   =      Ha      Na       na          ma
   ra     ña      Na       na          ma
16                              Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     These sounds are similar to English nasal consonants such as n and
     m. The velar and palatal nasals are similar to the nasal consonants
     in the English words ‘king’ and ‘bunch’, respectively.

     ya-h vaga- Other consonants (miscellaneous)
     The following consonants grouped together as ‘others’ are very
     similar to English sounds, so do not call for detailed phonetic
     description. The English transcription is sufficient to give you
     information about their pronunciation.

       ya       r       la      va                 Sa       sa   h
       ya       ra      la      wa/va              sha      sa   ha

     As mentioned above, the following two consonants are pronounced
     with a curled tongue. However, the underside of the tongue is flapped
     forward quickly, touching the hard palate slightly, instead of articu-
     lating the stop with the hard palate. Z, Rha is the aspirated counter-
     part of D, Ra.

       D,        Z,
       Ra        Rha

     Sanskrit letters
     The following four consonants are from Sanskrit. They do not exist
     in Hindi except in the handful of words borrowed from Sanskrit.

       Ya SHa         xa ksha        ~ tra          & gya
     Ya SHa is pronounced like Sa sha, and the other three letters represent
     consonant clusters in Hindi.

     Borrowed Perso-Arabic and English sounds
     By placing a dot under the following five consonant symbols, the
     five Perso-Arabic sounds are represented:

       f,       j,a     K,      k,           g,a
       fa       za      xa      qa           Ga

     Out of these five, the first two are used quite frequently in Hindi.
     The reason for this is that fa and za are also found in English. The
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                                  17


other three consonants are usually pronounced as kha, ka and ga,
respectively. Even the first two sounds fa and za can be pronounced
as pha and ja, respectively.
   It should be noted that English alveolar sounds t and d are usu-
ally perceived and written as T and D, respectively. So the t and d
in the proper name ‘Todd’ are written with the letters T and D,
respectively.


Pronunciation practice
Minimal pair practice                           (CD 1; 3)

Vowels
Oral vowels

Vowel       Pronunciation cue                        Hindi words
            (English near-equivalent)

A      a    about                                    kla    kal   yesterday/tomorrow
Aa     a    father                                   kala   kal   time, tense
[      i    sit                                      idna   din   day
[-     c    seat                                     dIna   dcn   poor
]      u    book                                     kula   kul   total, family
}      e    boot, loot                               kUla   kel   shore
e      e    late, date (without a glide)             hoo    he    hey
eo     s    bet                                      hO     hs    is
Aao    o    boat (without a glide)                   Aaor   or    side, towards
AaO    au   bought                                   AaOr   aur   and


Nasalized vowels á M

Nasalized vowels (long)                    Hindi words

Aaá    k                                   maaáM      mk      mother
[- M   m                                   khIM       kahm    somewhere
}á     o                                   hUá        ho      am
eá     g                                   maMo       mg      in
eoM    q                                   maOOOoM    mq      I
AaMo   õ                                   gaaoMd     gõd     gum
AaOM   ãj                                  caaMOk     cãjk    be alarmed, be startled
18                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Minimal pair practice: words with oral and
     nasalized vowels

     Oral vowels                     Nasalized vowels

     Aa a kha kaha said (m.sg)       Aaá k khaá kahk where
     [- c khI kahc said (f.sg)       [M- m khIM kahm somewhere
     } e pUC pech ask                }á o pUáC poch a tail
     e e lao le        take          eá g laoM lg        take (optative)
     eo s hO hs        is            eoM q hOM hq        are
     Aao o gaaod god the lap         AaoM õ gaaoMd gõd gum
     AaO au caaOk cauk a crossing    AaOM ãj caaOMk cãjk be alarmed, be startled


     Consonants              (CD 1; 4)

     Listen to the recording and repeat the words.

     Remember, the contrasts shown below are very critical in Hindi.
     Failing to maintain such contrasts will result in a breakdown of
     communication. If you want to ask for food, Kanaa khana failing to
     aspirate will result in saying kanaa kana and you will end up asking for
     a one-eyed person. Similarly, if you do not distinguish the T-group
     of consonants from the t-group of consonants, rather than asking
     for raoTI roTc, ‘bread’, you will end up reporting that the girl is crying
     (i.e. raotI rotc).

     Minimal pair practice: words with unvoiced
     unaspirated stops and unvoiced aspirated stops

     Unvoiced unaspirated                            Unvoiced aspirated

     k ka    kala kal   time                         K kha    Kala khal    skin
     ca ca   cala cal   walk                         C cha    Cla chal     cheat
     T Ta    Tala Tal   postpone                     z Tha    zala Thal    sit idle
     t ta    tana tan   tune                         qa tha   qaala thal   plate
     p pa    pla pal    moment                       f pha    fla phal     fruit
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                            19


Minimal pair practice: words with voiced
unaspirated stops and voiced aspirated stops

Voiced unaspirated                 Voiced aspirated

ga ga   gaa ga      sing           Ga gha   Gaa gha  the fourth letter of the
                                                       k-series
ja ja   jala jal    water          Ja jha Jala jhal fan
D Da    Dala Dal    a branch       Z Dha Zala Dhal shield
d da    dana dan    charity        Qa dha Qaana dhan paddy
ba ba   baala bal   hair           Ba bha Baala bhal forehead


Minimal pair practice: words with unvoiced
aspirated stops and voiced aspirated stops

Unvoiced aspirated                      Voiced aspirated

K kha Kanaa khana food                  Ga gha Gaanaa ghana Ghana, the name
                                                                 of a country
C cha Cla chal        cheat             Ja jha Jala jhal       fan
z Tha zk Thak         tapping sound     Z Dha Zk Dhak          cover
qa tha qaana than     roll of cloth     Qa dha Qaana dhan      paddy
f pha fUla phel       flower            Ba bha BaUla bhel      mistake


Minimal pair practice: words with the T-group
(retroflex) stops and the t-group (dental) stops

T-vaga- T-group                              t-vaga- t-group
T Ta     Tala Tal     postpone               t ta     tala tal    pond
Z Tha    zk Thak      tapping (sound)        qa tha   qak thak    be tired
D Da     Dala Dal     branch                 d da     dala dal    lentil
Z Dha    Zk Dhak      cover                  Qa dha   Qak dhak    palpitation,
                                                                     excitement

Listen to the following:
20                          Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Nasal consonants

     Nasal consonant                                  Hindi word

     = ra                                             AMga arg     body, limb
     Ha ña                                            AMjaU añje   female name
     Na Na                                            baaNa baN    arrow
     na na                                            naana nan    bread
     ma ma                                            maana man    respect


     Other consonants

     Listen to the following words:

     Consonant                                     Hindi word

     ya ya                                         yaar yar     friend
     r ma                                          rajaa raja   king
     la la                                         laala lal    red
     va wa/va                                      vaar var     an attack
     Sa sha                                        Saala shal   shawl
     sa sa                                         saala sal    year
     h ha                                          hala hal     condition, state


     Minimal pair practice: words with r, R and Rh

     Consonant                                          Hindi word

     r ra                                               pr par on, at
     D, Ra                                              pD, paR lie, fall
     Z, Rha                                             pZ, paRh read, study


     Borrowed consonants

        f,       j,a   K,    k,       g,a
        fa       za    xa    qa       Ga

     As pointed out earlier, these consonants were not present in Hindi
     originally. Many speakers of Hindi still substitute the closest corres-
     ponding Hindi consonant for them, as shown below:
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                                  21


   f,,     fa         becomes             f        pha
   j,a     za         becomes             ja       ja
   K,      xa         becomes             K        kha
   k,,     qa         becomes             k        ka
   ga,     Ga         becomes             ga       ga

In other words, the dots are added to the native symbols to rep-
resent the borrowed sounds.
   Now listen to the two possible pronunciations of the following
words.

Consonant Word                                                   Consonant Word

f, fa    f,Isa f cs      tuition, fee                            f pha   fIsa phcs
ja, za   ja,ra zara      just, a little                          ja ja   jara jara
K, xa    K,rId xarcd     buy                                     K kha   KrId kharcd
k, qa    k,lama qalam    pen                                     k ka    klama kalam
ga, Ga   ga,rIba Garcb   poor                                    ga ga   garIba garcb

Syllables, stress and intonation: see Script Unit 5.


   Punctuation marks

   With the exception of the full stop, which is represented by the
   sign ., Hindi uses the same punctuation marks as English. For
   abbreviation purposes, a small circle • is used after the first
   syllable. For example, pM• stands for Pandit. Sometimes the sign ^
   is used over the vowel Aa a to represent the English sound o, as
   in jaa^na ‘John’ and yaa^k- ‘York’.



Numerals


   1       2      3       4       5            6     7   8   9       0

If you do not have the recording, either skip the following section or
seek the assistance of a native speaker.
22                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1          (CD 1; 5)

     Listen to each group of three words and circle the word that is
     different.

                                  A     B       C
                                  kr    Kr      kr
         Example: you hear        kar   khar    kar
         Answer:                        B

     1   A     B     C
     2   A     B     C
     3   A     B     C
     4   A     B     C
     5   A     B     C


     Exercise 2          (CD 1; 6)

     Listen to each group of four words and circle the aspirated words.

                                  A     B       C       D
                                  kr    Kr      gar     Gar
         Example: you hear:       kar   khar    gar     ghar
         Answer:                        B, D

     1   A     B     C        D
     2   A     B     C        D
     3   A     B     C        D
     4   A     B     C        D
     5   A     B     C        D

     Exercise 3          (CD 1; 7)

     Listen to pairs of words contrasting the T-group (retroflex) and the
     t-group of consonants.

         A           B
         iTk Tik     itk tik
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                 23


After each pair has been pronounced, you will hear either ‘A’ or ‘B’
again. Underline the word that you hear this time.

    Example: you hear iTk Tik, then underline Tik.

1   tak     tak         Tak     Tak
2   qak     thak        zk      Thak
3   daga    dag         Daga    Dag
4   Qak     dhak        Zk      Dhak
5   Par     par         PaD,    paR
6   sar     sar         saD,    saR
7   krI     karc        kZ,I    kaRh c
8   qaIk    th ck       zIk     Th ck

Exercise 4                   (CD 1; 8)

Listen to pairs of words with constrasting vowel sounds.

    A               B
    idna din        dIna dcn
After each pair has been pronounced, you will hear either ‘A’ or ‘B’
again. Underline the word that you hear this time.

    Example: you hear dIna dcn, then underline dcn.

    A                B
1   kala    kal      kla       kal
2   idna    din      dIna      dcn
3   imala   mil      maIla     mcl
4   cauk    cuk      caUk      cek
5   maola   mel      maOla     msl
6   saor    ser      saOr      ssr
7   ibana   bin      baIna     bcn
8   baala   bal      bala      bal
24                                                             Transcription table




     Transcription table

     If you wish to learn Hindi principally via the Roman/English path
     or if you are used to seeing Hindi words in the English or Bollywood
     media, you might find the transcription of Hindi words a little odd
     or unfamiliar at first. However, a quick glance will reveal that media
     transcription is usually very broad, ambiguous and inconsistent.
     English–Hindi bilinguals/native speakers can cope with such trans-
     cription because they know the target word. Foreign learners do not
     have this advantage.
        It is imperative that learners make themselves familiar with the
     scientific transcription used in this book – SALT, the transcription
     system widely used in South Asian language and literature. Such
     familiarity is critical to avoiding mishaps in communication and
     to increase learning efficiency: see the section entitled ‘Hindi writing
     system and pronunciation’ for details. The table below provides you
     with a convenient source of reference for Hindi sounds.

     Letter         SALT (South                     Media      As in English words
     (Devanagari)   Asian Language
                    Transcription)

     Vowels

     A              a                               uh/a       about
     Aa             a                               aa/ah/a    father
     [              i                               i/e        sit
     [-             c                               ee         seat
     ]              u                               u          book
     }              e                               oo/u       boot, loot
     e              e                               ay/e       late, date (without
                                                                   a glide)
     eo             s (ai)                          ai/aye     bet
     Aao            o                               o          boat (without a glide)
     AaO            au                              au         bought
     Nasal vowels   (e.g. ã, h, k, m . . . ); see    vowel +
                       ‘Hindi writing system           n/m
                       and pronunciation’
Transcription table                                                                 25


Letter           SALT (South                  Media      As in English words
(Devanagari)     Asian Language
                 Transcription)

Consonants

k                ka                           ka/ca      back
K                k ha                         kha/ka     cat
ga               ga                           ga         gate
Ga               g ha                         gha        hog-hog
=                ra                           na         king
ca               ca                           cha        church
C                c ha                         chha       church (with slight puff
                                                           of air)
ja               ja                           ja         jug
Ja               j ha                         jha/ja     hedge-hog
Ha               ña                           na         bunch
T                Ta                           ta         Not in English: see
z                Tha                          t ha         ‘Hindi writing system
D/D,             Da/Ra                        da/da        and pronunciation’
Z/Z,             Dha/Rha                      dha/da
Na               Na                           na
t                ta                           ta         cat
qa               t ha                         t ha       tin
d                da                           da         dog
Qa               d ha                         dha        dharma
na               na                           na         nab
p                pa                           pa         zip
f/f,             p ha                         pha        Pat
ba               ba                           ba         bat
Ba               b ha                         bha        tab-let
ma               ma                           ma         mat
ya               ya                           ya         yes
r                ra                           ra         rat
la               la                           la         late
va               wa/va                        wa/va      vat
Sa               sha                          sha        she
Ya               SHa                          SHa        Like retroflex; not in
                                                             English
sa               sa                           sa         sit
h                ha                           ha         hat

Source: Adapted from Bhatia, Tej K. (2000). Advertising in Rural India: Language,
Marketing Communication and Consumerism. Tokyo: Institute for the Study of
Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.
26                                         Transcription table


     A sample of transcriptional variation

     Media              SALT

     Mahabharat         Mahabharata ‘Sanskrit epic’
     Ramayan            ramayaNa ‘Sanskrit epic’
     gharana            gharana ‘lineage’
     akashvani          akashvaNc ‘radio’
     doordarshan        derdharshan ‘television’
     beedi, beeri       bcRc ‘native cigarette’
     Chaay              cay ‘tea’
     Chaarpay           carpac ‘a string bed with four wooden legs’
     Amitabh Bachhan    Amitabh Baccan (famous actor)
Script unit 1            27




ilaip AaOr laoKna
lipi aur lekhan
Script and handwriting
Script unit 1                                                               29




1 phlaa paz – ilaip
  pshla paTh – lipi
          Script unit 1




The first letter of the Devanagari script is A a.
   When the preceding sound is a consonant, it is inherent in the
consonant, so it is not written separately (as in the Hindi word
pr par ‘on/at’). In all other situations, however, it is written separ-
ately (e.g. Aba ab ‘now’).
   Look at the following combinations of consonants with the vowel
A a and try to read them aloud first. You may need to refer to the
consonant chart in the transcription table.


Letters                   Word                             Pronunciation

p         +   r     =     pr
pa        +   ra    =     para     on/at                   par
A         +   ba    =     Aba
a         +   ba    =     aba      now                     ab
k         +   la    =     kla
ka        +   la    =     kala     yesterday/tomorrow      kal


   Note that with a preceding p, r, b, k or l the independent shape of
the vowel A is not used. In such cases the vowel is absorbed into the
consonant. It is for this reason that Hindi script is called a ‘syllabic’
script, i.e. a consonant letter such as k stands for k + a. Each con-
sonant letter is not written separately, as is the case with the Roman
script. So, k + a cannot be written as k + A. Of course, there are
ways to write a consonant without a vowel; we will learn to do this
at a later stage.
   If you thought that the vowel -a at the end of a word is absorbed
into the preceding consonant, but is not pronounced (i.e. silent) in
Standard Hindi speech, you would be right. So, a word written as
30                                                            Script unit 1


     pr para ‘on/at’ is actually pronounced as par. Some dialects of Hindi
     do not drop the word-final a in pronunciation.
        Combinations of three or more consonants follow the same
     pattern.


     Letters                               Word                Pronunciation

     sa        +   D,   +    k         =   saD,k
     sa        +   Ra   +    ka        =   saRakx      road    saRak
     ma        +   ga   +    r         =   magar
     ma        +   ga   +    ra        =   magarx      but     magar
     A         +   ga   +    r         =   Agar
     a         +   ga   +    ra        =   agarx       if      agar




     Handwriting

     Stroke order

     Letter/            Stroke order          Head stroke/      Handwriting
     Pronunciation                            Head bar


     k – vaga-
     k ka
     Kka  h


     ga ga
     Ga g a
          h




     ca – vaga-
     ca ca
     C ca h


     ja ja
     Ja j a
          h
Script unit 1                                               31


Letter/         Stroke order   Head stroke/   Handwriting
Pronunciation                  Head bar


T – vaga-
T Ta
z Ta    h


D Da
Z Da    h


Na Na
t – vaga-
t ta
qa t a
    h


d da
Qa d a
    h


na na
p – vaga-
p pa
fpa h


ba ba
Ba b a
    h


ma ma
ya – h vaga-
ya ya
r ra
la la
va va
Sa sha
Ya SHa
32                                                              Script unit 1


     Letter/                 Stroke order        Head stroke/     Handwriting
     Pronunciation                               Head bar

     sa sa
     h ha
     saMskRt
     xa ksha
     ~ tra
     & gya/jya
     Anya Other retroflex letters
     Dº Ra
     Zº R a h




     Observation exercise
     Similar-looking characters
       Ga       gha    Qa   dha
       K        kha    r    ra        va wa/va
       ba       ba     va   wa/va
       Ba       bha    ma   ma
       d        da     D    Da        Z Dha          D, Ra      Z, Rha
       qa       t ha   ya   ya


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1
     Read aloud the Hindi words given below. Feel free to consult the
     consonant chart in the transcription table. However, resist the
     temptation to transcribe and write every letter before you pronounce
     the word. Treat this as an exercise in simple arithmetic addition. The
     difference is that you have words rather than numbers here.
Script unit 1                                                                 33


  You can compare your pronunciation against the recording, if
you have it.

1 Amana 2 Asala 3 jalana 4 klama 5 kmala 6 garma 7 jaba 8 kba 9 tba 10 saba

Exercise 2

Identify and transcribe the following letters. Also, observe some
similarities between these letters.

    k      ya      qa     t    Ga    Qa    Ba     ma    va    ba

Exercise 3

Write the following in the Devanagari alphabet.

1   kha, ra, wa/va
2   Ta, ta, Tha, tha
3   da, Da, dha, Dha
4   pa, pha, ba, ya
5   ra, Ra, Rha

Exercise 4

Write the following words in Hindi script. Assume that the word-
final vowel a is dropped.

1 kaT           2 gal     3 cal      4 namak        5 sabak        6 parakh
7 sadar         8 calan   9 man     10 pal         11 garam


    Web resources
    For the dynamics of stroke order, see Syracuse University’s
    Hindi web page:
        http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/jishnu/101/alphabet/
          default.asp?section=0
    The following link is also recommended:
        http://www.avashy.com/hindiscripttutor.htm
34                                                         Script unit 2




     2 dUsara paz – ilaip
       desra paTh – lipi
              Script unit 2




     In Script Unit 1, we learnt how to use the independent form of short
     A a and about its absorption into the preceding consonant.
        Now, let us learn to combine dependent forms of more vowel
     symbols. The independent and dependent forms (maa~a matra) of Hindi
     vowels are given below:



     Independent          Dependent (maa~a mAtrA)      Position
                          ‘Following a consonant’

     A a                  0 (zero)
     Aa a                 a                            after a consonant
     [ i                  i                            before a consonant
     [- c                 I                            after a consonant
     ] u                     u                         under a consonant
     } e                   U                           under a consonant
     e e                     o                         top of a consonant
     eo s                    O                         top of a consonant
     Aao o                ao                           after a consonant
     AaO au               aO                           after a consonant



     Now let us consider the following three dependent vowel symbols:

        a     long    a
        i     short   i
        I     long    c

     As mentioned above, a and I are placed after a consonant, whereas
     i is placed before a consonant, as shown below:
Script unit 2                                                                       35


    ga   + a                       k + I                        k   + i
    ga + a                         ka + c                       ka + i
      gaa ga                         kI kc                        ik ki
Notice when a dependent form of the vowel is adjoined to a con-
sonant, the invisible short A a is actually absorbed. As mentioned in
script unit 1, the word-final short a is silent.

    baa  + t                       ba          + ta             tI       + na
   ba + ta                         ba          + ta             tc       + na
     baat bat                             bata bata                   tIna tcn
  thing, matter                              tell                     three

Now look at the following examples:

    baa+          rI               ca        + naa              iga     +      ra
    ba +          rc               ca        + na               gi      +      ra
          baarI                             canaa                      igara
          turn                     chick pea                           fell

Observe the following three-syllable words:

  k       + ha                 + naI           khanaI story
  ka      + ha                 + nc

  ma + saa                     + laa           masaalaa spice
  ma + sa                      + la

  ik      + Qa                 + r             ikQar where, which direction
  ki      + dha                + ra

  kI      + ma                 + t             kImat price
  kc      + ma                 + ta

Now let us turn our attention to the next four dependent vowel
forms.

      u      U             o          O
   u        e          e          s

These vowel symbols are either placed above or below a consonant
symbol, as shown here:
36                                                            Script unit 2


       tu            tU         to         tO
       tu            te         te         ts

     Read the following words. (In what follows the absence of the word-
     final short a is assumed.)

       cau       +        k     =    cauk            finish
       cu        +        ka         cuk

       pU        +        C     = pUC                ask
       pe        +        cha   = pech

       jao       +        la    = jaola              jail
       je        +        la    = jel

       pO        +        saa   = pOsaa              money
       ps        +        sa    = pssa


       Exceptions
       When u and U are joined to r ra, they are joined to the middle
       joint of the r, as shown below:
             r   +        u          r    +      e
             r + u                   r + U


                 É                         $


     It is incorrect to place u and U below the r as in ru ru and rU re.
         Also, notice the difference in the shape of u. With r the symbol of
     the dependent vowel u becomes º
         Now here are the last two dependent vowel forms:

       ao            aO
       o         au

     They are placed to the right of a consonant like a and c, as shown
     below:

       Cao       + Ta =                  CaoTa       small
       cho       + Ta
Script unit 2                                                                                            37


      caaO        + k          =   caaOk             crossing
      cau         + k

Observe some more examples of the vowels in question:

      p           + D,aO       + saI =               pD,aOsaI           neighbour
      pa          + rau        + sc

      haO         + sa         + laa =               haOsalaa           courage
      hau         + sa         + la

      paO         + Saa        + k         =         paOSaak            dress
      pao         + sha        + k

      ina         + caao       + D,        =         inacaaoD,          squeeze, essence
      ni          + co         + R

The use of maa~a matra vowels with preceding consonants is shown
below. The consonants that never occur with matra vowels are not
listed here.


k            ka         ik         kI          ku                kU        ko     kO       kao    kaO
ka           ka         ki         kc          ku                ke        ke     ks       ko     kau
K            Ka         iK         KI          Ku                KU        Ko     KO       Kao    KaO
kha          kha        khi        khc         khu               khe       khe    khs      kho    khau
ga           gaa        iga        gaI         gau               gaU       gao    gaO      gaao   gaaO
ga           ga         gi         gc          gu                ge        ge     gs       go     gau
Ga           Gaa        iGa        GaI         Gau               GaU       Gao    GaO      Gaao   GaaO
gha          gha        ghi        ghc         ghu               ghe       ghe    ghs      gho    ghau

ca           caa        ica        caI         cau               caU       cao    caO      caao   caaO
ca           ca         ci         cc          cu                ce        ce     cs       co     cau
C            Ca         iC         CI          Cu                CU        Co     CO       Cao    CaO
cha          cha        chi        chc         chu               che       che    chs      c ho   chau
ja           jaa        ija        jaI         jau               jaU       jao    jaO      jaao   jaaO
ja           ja         ji         jc          ju                je        je     js       jo     jau
Ja           Jaa        iJa        JaI         Jau               JaU       Jao    JaO      Jaao   JaaO
jha          jha        jhi        jhc         jhu               jhe       jh e   jhs      jho    jhau

T            Ta         iT         TI          Tu                TU        To     TO       Tao    TaO
Ta           Ta         Ti         Tc          Tu                Te        Te     Ts       To     Tau
z            za         iz         zI          zu                zU        zo     zO       zao    zaO
Th a         Th a       Th i       Thc         Thu               Th e      Th e   Th s     Th o   Thau
38                                                          Script unit 2


     D      Da     iD     DI    Du     DU     Do     DO      Dao    DaO
     Da     Da     Di     Dc    Du     De     De     Ds      Do     Dau
     Z      Za     iZ     ZI    Zu     ZU     Zo     ZO      Zao    ZaO
     Dha    Dha    Dhi    Dhc   D hu   Dhe    Dhe    Dhs     Dho    Dhau
     Na     Naa    iNa    NaI   Nau    NaU    Nao    NaO     Naao   NaaO
     Na     Na     Ni     Nc    Nu     Ne     Ne     Ns      No     Nau
     t      ta     it     tI    tu     tU     to     tO      tao    taO
     ta     ta     ti     tc    tu     te     te     ts      to     tau
     qa     qaa    iqa    qaI   qau    qaU    qao    qaO     qaao   qaaO
     th a   th a   th i   thc   th u   th e   th e   th s    th o   thau
     d      da     id     dI    du     dU     do     dO      dao    daO
     da     da     di     dc    du     de     de     ds      do     dau
     Qa     Qaa    iQa    QaI   Qau    QaU    Qao    QaO     Qaao   QaaO
     dha    dha    dhi    dhc   dhu    dhe    dhe    dhs     dho    dhau
     na     naa    ina    naI   nau    naU    nao    naO     naao   naaO
     na     na     ni     nc    nu     ne     ne     ns      no     nau
     p      pa     ip     pI    pu     pU     po     pO      pao    paO
     pa     pa     pi     pc    pu     pe     pe     ps      po     pau
     f      fa     if     fI    fu     fU     fo     fO      fao    faO
     pha    pha    phi    phc   phu    phe    phe    phs     pho    phau
     ba     baa    iba    baI   bau    baU    bao    baO     baao   baaO
     ba     ba     bi     bc    bu     be     be     bs      bo     bau
     Ba     Baa    iBa    BaI   Bau    BaU    Bao    BaO     Baao   BaaO
     bha    bha    bhi    bhc   bhu    bhe    bhe    bhs     bho    bhau
     ma     maa    ima    maI   mau    maU    mao    maO     maao   maaO
     ma     ma     mi     mc    mu     me     me     ms      mo     mau
     ya     yaa    iya    yaI   yau    yaU    yao    yaO     yaao   yaaO
     ya     ya     yi     yc    yu     ye     ye     ys      yo     yau
     r      ra     ir     rI    É      $      ro     rO      rao    raO
     ra     ra     ri     rc    ru     re     re     rs      ro     rau
     la     laa    ila    laI   lau    laU    lao    laO     laao   laaO
     la     la     li     lc    lu     le     le     ls      lo     lau
     va     vaa    iva    vaI   vau    vaU    vao    vaO     vaao   vaaO
     va     va     vi     vc    vu     ve     ve     vs      vo     vau
     Sa     Saa    iSa    SaI   Sau    SaU    Sao    SaO     Saao   SaaO
     sha    sha    shi    shc   shu    she    she    shs     sho    shau
     Ya     Yaa    iYa    YaI   Yau    YaU    Yao    YaO     Yaao   YaaO
     SHa    SHa    SHi    SHc   SHu    SHe    She    SHs     SHo    SHau
     sa     saa    isa    saI   sau    saU    sao    saO     saao   saaO
     sa     sa     si     sc    su     se     se     ss      so     sau
     h      ha     ih     hI    hu     hU     ho     hO      hao    haO
     ha     ha     hi     hc    hu     he     he     hs      ho     hau
Script unit 2                                                                     39


The horizontal bar/head stroke and words

The horizontal bar is placed on a word. Thus kam k a ma = kama but
not ka ma.


AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1

Read the following Hindi words aloud and transcribe them. Note
that your transcription should take into account the word-final
absence of the short vowel A a.

 1 BaarI    2 baD,a    3 iktnaa 4 kalaa      5 Baart         6 gaaD,I 7 iknaara
 8 gaIt     9 gaayaba 10 caavala 11 caahnaa 12 icaiD,yaaGar 13 j,ara 14 jaIvana
15 jaapana 16 caaor 17 maaor     18 fla     19 BaUt         20 caaOqaa 21 DaOla
22 puilasa 23 haqaI 24 isatar 25 Saama


Exercise 2

Write the following words in Devanagari script:

 1 jabki 2 kc        3 bazar    4 raja    5 ranc 6 pahacan
 7 nac    8 banaras 9 kanapur 10 mata    11 pita 12 kabhc
13 milan 14 zamcn 15 kar       16 mahcna 17 sal 18 din
19 car   20 sat     21 savera  22 cay    23 panc 24 pati
25 bhale 26 rat     27 dopahar 28 khol   29 sau 30 sona


Exercise 3

Practise writing the following names:

1 Richard     2 Bill   3 Sarah (seyra)     4 Jennifer     5 Don


Exercise 4

The following words are written incorrectly in Hindi. Look at their
transcription and write their correct form in Hindi:
40                                                     Script unit 2


     Correct   Incorrect   Correct   Correct   Incorrect     Correct

     rupaya    rupyaa                Dar       dr
     rekha     rUKa                  nam       naaBa
     kar       kAr                   than      Qaana
     ki        ki                    ghar      Qar
     aur       Aar                   Dal       D,ala
Script unit 3                                                               41




3 tIsara paz – ilaip
  tcsra paTh – lipi
          Script unit 3




Independent vowels
In this unit we will learn how to use independent vowel forms and
nasalized vowels. In the last unit we showed that dependent counter-
parts are used with a preceding consonant. In all other cases, the
independent form is used. Here is the list of the independent vowels
again. These vowels are also called ‘main’ vowels.

  A        Aa     [     [-        ]     }        e     eo    Aaoo     AaO
  a        a      i     c         u     e        e     s     o        au

When the word begins with a vowel, the independent form of the
vowel is used, as in

  Aa + ma        = Aama          mango, common
  a    +       m = am

but not the dependent form

  a + ma = ama

Similarly:

  [ + Qa          + r        =   [Qar       in this direction, here
  i   + dha       + r

but not

  i + Qa          +   r = iQar
42                                                           Script unit 3


     Also, observe in the following example:

       AaO + r = AaOr                and
       au +        r

     but not

       aO + r = aOr
     If the preceding sound is a vowel, the independent form of a vowel is
     used, e.g.:

       a     +     i   + e
       Aa + [ + e = Aa[e                   please come

     but not any of the following ways:

       a + i + e = aie
       a + i + o = ai o
       Aa + i + o = Aai o
     Now you should be able to distinguish between the following two
     words:

       k + c             ka +        c

           kI of         k[- several
     Notice that the independent form of [- c is used in k[- kac because its
     preceding sound is the vowel a A.


     Nasalized vowels
     In our transcription, vowel nasalization is indicated by a tilde ~ over
     the transliterated vowel.
        In Hindi, the two symbols which are used to mark vowel nasal-
     ization are: candrabindu (moon dot) á and bindu (dot) M. The former
     is used either over the head stroke of the vowel itself or over the
     head stroke of the consonant to which the vowel is attached. If any
     part of the vowel is written above the head stroke, then the dot is
     used rather than the moon dot. Note the following examples:

       moon dot á            dot M
Script unit 3                                                                         43


Nasalized vowel             Independent vowel           Dependent vowel (matra)

k                           Aaá                         aá
m                           [- M                        IM
o                           }á                          áU
g                           eá                          oM
q                           eoM                         OM
õ                           AaoM                        aoM
ãj                          AaOM                        aOM


Now examine the usage of the nasalized vowels in the following
words:

     h   + aá     =   haá          yes             h    + áU =    háU      am
     h   + k                                       h    + o

     Aaá + K      = AaáK           eye             ma+ aá = maaá mother
     k   + kh     = kkh                            m + k = mk

     }á + T       = }áT            camel           ma + oM = maoM in
     o   + T      = oT                             m + g = mg

     AaOM + Qaa
              = AaOOOOMQaa overturned              ma+ OM = maOM I
     ãj + dha = ãjdha                              m + q = mq


lao#ana lekhan Writing

Letter/               Stroke order              Head stroke/            Handwriting
pronunciation                                   Head bar

Aa
Aa a
[ i
[- c
] u
}e
e e
44                                                          Script unit 3


     Letter/               Stroke order      Head stroke/     Handwriting
     pronunciation                           Head bar


     eo s
     Aao o
     AaO au
     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1

     Write the following expressions in Devanagari script. Since they are
     useful, their English translation is also provided.

      1 thana vahm hs.
        The police station is right there.
      2 ap merc madad kar sakte hq?
        Can you help me?
      3 mq vahk ksse jao?
        How shall I get there?
      4 ye merc galatc nahm.
        This is not my mistake.
      5 yahk xatra hs.
        There is danger here.
      6 bacao!
        Save! (or help!)
      7 ye (written as yah) bahut zarerc hs.
        This is very urgent.
      8 Dak-khana kahk hs?
        Where is the post office?
      9 kis khiRkc par jao?
        Which window should I go to?
     10 TikaT (ticket) kitna lagega?
        How much postage will (it) need?
Script unit 3                                                      45


11 e-mail amrcka (America) bhejana cahata ho.
   (I) want to send an e-mail to America.
12 mujhe cinta/fikr hs.
   I am worried.


Exercise 2

If you have the recording, listen to the above expressions while
silently reading them.

Exercise 3

Write the following words in Devanagari script:

1 aie 2 ao    3 khaie     4 khao 5 kha lo 6 maika (Mike)


Exercise 4

Oral vs nasal vowels

1   ha exclamatory sound vs haá yes
2   hU a sound              háU am
3   hO is                   hOM are
4   mao May                 maoM in

Now transcribe the above words into Roman.
46                                                            Script unit 4




     4 caaOqaa paz – ilaip
       cautha paTh – lipi
              Script unit 4




     Conjunct letters
     In script unit 1 I mentioned that since Devanagari script is syllabic,
     every consonant symbol contains an invisible A a in it. Now let us
     learn to write consonants without this vowel. Such consonants are
     also called ‘half’ consonants.
        The simplest way to drop the A a is to use the sign \ called ‘hal’ or
     ‘halant’. For example, if you want to write the word kya, just put
     the halant sign under k and then go on to write the next syllable.
     However, Hindi speakers, particularly in handwriting, tend to prefer
     special conjunct symbols over the halant sign. The halant is more
     prevalent in word processing and the Internet. These special conjuncts
     are described in this section.
        If the consonant has a right vertical stroke a, the vertical line is
     dropped, as in:

     Consonant            Conjunct form              Word with a conjunct
                          (half consonant)

     #,a xa               #, x                       sa#,t saxt         hard
     ga ga                gg                         Aigna agni         fire
     ca ca                cc                         AcCa accha         good
     ja ja                jj                         jyaaoM jyõ         as
     Na Na                NN                         zNDa ThaNDa        cold
     t ta                 % t                        %yaaOhar tyauhar   festival
     na na                n n                        AnQaa andha        blind
     sa sa                ss                         sasta sasta        cheap


     Notice the placement of the dependent form of the vowel i i which is
     placed before the conjunct letter g g but is pronounced after the n n.
Script unit 4                                                            47


   Consonants which contain the stroke a in their middle have the
following forms:

  k ka         @k       @yaa kya      what
  f,, fa       F, f     hF,ta hafta   week

For all other letters, either the halant sign is used or the conjunct
letter sits on the top of the full consonant letter, as in:

  T\ T + T Ta         T\ + T    T + Ta       or      TR
                      pT\TI     paTTc        or      p+I bandage

  D\ D + D Da         D\ + D    D + Da       or      â
                      AD\Da     aDDa         or      Aâa station (bus)

With the emergence of new printing technology, the halant form is
gaining more prominence.


Exceptions
Once again r ra is notorious and it needs special attention. The
symbol for the conjunct r is - , as in

  k  +     - + ma     = kma-             but not   k-ma
  ka +     r     + ma = karma            fate

The conjunct r is placed at the very end of the syllable it precedes,
e.g.

  va   +   - + maa    = vamaa-           but not va-maa
  va   +   r     + ma = Varma            a last name

When r is the second member of the conjunct, it is realized as `.
Note the following clusters with r.

  P    + `        =   P`a
  p    + ra       =   pra
  %    + `        =   t`
  t    + ra       =   tra
48                                                           Script unit 4


       S    + `      =   Ea
       sh   + ra     =   shra

     With T Ta and D Da, / is added rather than -.

       T\   + /      =   T/
       T    + ra     =   Tra
       D\   + /      =   D/
       D    + ra     =   Dra


     Long consonants
     With the exception of tta, the long consonants follow the conjunct
     formation rules described above.

       %    + t      =   <a but not %t
       t    + ta     =   tta


     Nasal consonants
     In Script Unit 3 we saw that the moon dot and the simple dot can
     express vowel nasalization. However, the dot has yet another func-
     tion. When it appears over either a short vowel or a consonant, it
     shows the presence of a homorganic nasal consonant. ‘Homorganic’
     means the sound is produced by the same speech organ. The con-
     sonants listed in each of the five groups in the consonant chart
     are homorganic. For example, the five consonant sounds listed in
     the fifth column – = r, Ha ñ, Na N, na n and ma m are homorganic to the
     rest of the velar, palatal, retroflex, dental and labial consonants,
     respectively.
        When a dot is placed either over a short vowel or a consonant, it
     indicates the corresponding homorganic conjunct nasal consonant
     of the following consonant. So the dot can also be written with a
     conjunct nasal consonant, as in

       AMga =    A=\ga        arg      limb
       pMca =    pHca         pañc     juror
       zMD =     zND          ThaND    cold
       ihMdI =   ihndI        hindc    the Hindi language
       KMbaa =   Kmbaa        khamba   pole
Script unit 4                                                                 49



    Web resources
    For more details, see Syracuse University’s Hindi web page:

         http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/jishnu/101/alphabet/
           default.asp?section=0
    For more on consonant clusters:

         http://www.avashy.com/hindiscripttutor.htm
         http://acharya.iitm.ac.in/sanskrit/lessons/Devan/conj_1.html




The hide and seek game of A a

I mentioned in the chapter on the Hindi writing system and pro-
nunciation that the Devanagari script is a phonetic script and that
the words are primarily written in the way they are pronounced.
However, one should keep in mind that language is a living thing;
it keeps changing and even the most scientific script cannot keep
up with all the changes. We have already discussed the case of the
word-final silence of A a in Script Units 1 and 2. Now do some detect-
ive work and see another situation in which A a is written but not
pronounced.


Word              Written Pronounced Word             Written    Pronounced

saD,k             saRak    saRak         saD,koM      saRak+g    saRkg
road                                     road
AaOrt             aurat    aurat         AaOrtoM      aurat+g    aurtg
woman                                    women
laD,k             laRak    laRak         laD,ka       laRak+a    laRka
child (not                               boy
  used alone)
laD,k             laRak    laRak         laD,kI       laRak+c    laRkc
child (not                               girl
  used alone)
samaJa            samajh   samajh        samaJaa      samajh+a samjha
understand                               understood
