Colloquial


Hindi
The Colloquial Series
The following languages are available in the Colloquial series:

Afrikaans                German                 Romanian
Albanian                 Greek                  Russian
Amharic                  Gujarati               Scottish Gaelic
Arabic (Levantine)       Hebrew                 Serbian
Arabic of Egypt          Hindi                  Slovak
Arabic of the Gulf and   Hungarian              Slovene
   Saudi Arabia          Icelandic              Somali
Basque                   Indonesian             Spanish
Breton                   Irish (forthcoming)    Spanish of Latin
Bulgarian                Italian                   America
Cambodian                Japanese               Swahili
Cantonese                Korean                 Swedish
Catalan                  Latvian                Tamil
Chinese                  Lithuanian             Thai
Croatian                 Malay                  Turkish
Czech                    Mongolian              Ukrainian
Danish                   Norwegian              Urdu
Dutch                    Panjabi                Vietnamese
English                  Persian                Welsh
Estonian                 Polish                 Yoruba
Finnish                  Portuguese
French                   Portuguese of Brazil

COLLOQUIAL 2s Series
The Next Step in Language Learning
Chinese                  Italian                Spanish
Dutch                    Portuguese of Brazil   Spanish of Latin
French                      (forthcoming)         America
German (forthcoming)     Russian
All these Colloquials are available in book and CD packs, or sold
separately. You can order them from http://www.routledge.com or
from your bookseller.
Colloquial
Hindi
The Complete Course
for Beginners

Tej K. Bhatia
First published 1996
by Routledge
This edition first published 2008
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2008 Tej K. Bhatia
Typeset in 10/12 pt Times by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong



All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bhatia, Tej K.
  Colloquial Hindi : a complete course for beginners /
  Tej K. Bhatia. – [2nd, rev. ed.].
       p. cm.
    Previously published: 1996.
    Includes index.
  1. Hindi language – Textbooks for foreign speakers – English. 2. Hindi
  language – Conversation and phrase books – English. 3. Hindi language
  – Grammar. I. Title.
  PK1935.B525 2007
  491′. 4382421–dc22                                           2007001478

ISBN10: 0–415–41956–5 (pbk)
ISBN10: 0–415–39528–3 (audio CDs)
ISBN10: 0–415–39527–5 (pack)

ISBN13: 978–0–415–41956–7 (pbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–39528–1 (audio CDs)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–39527–4 (pack)
ISBN13: 978–1–315–74137–6 (eBook Pack)
              In memory of
my mother, Shrimati Krishna Wanti Bhatia
                   and
   my father, Shri Parma Nand Bhatia
Contents

Preface                                   ix
Acknowledgements                         xi
Introduction                               1
Hindi writing system and pronunciation     9
Transcription table                      24

ilaip AaOr laoKna                        27
Script and handwriting
 1 phlaa paz – ilaip                     29
   Script unit 1
 2 dUsara paz – ilaip                    34
   Script unit 2
 3 tIsara paz – ilaip                    41
   Script unit 3
 4 caaOqaa paz – ilaip                   46
   Script unit 4
 5 paácavaaá paz – ilaip                 53
   Script unit 5

Paaz                                     63
Units
 1 namasto/ namaskar.                    65
   namaste/namaskar
   Greetings and social etiquette
 2 Aap khaá ko/ kI hOMÆ                  81
   Where are you from?
viii                                              Contents


        3 Aapkao @yaa caaiheÆ                          98
          apko kya cahiye?
          What would you like?
        4 Aapko SaaOk @yaa hOMÆ                       117
          ap ke shauk kya hq?
          What are your hobbies?
        5 Cui+yaaoM maoM @yaa kroMgaoÆ                138
          chuTTiyõ mg kya kargge?
          What will you do during the break?
        6 kla @yaa ikyaaÆ                             157
          kal kya kiya?
          What did you do yesterday?
        7 @yaa Aap ihndI baaola sakto hOMÆ            175
          kya ap hindc bol sakte hq?
          Can you speak Hindi?
        8 mauJao caOk kOSa krvaanao hOM.              199
          mujhe cheque cash karvane hq
          I need to get cheques cashed
        9 facaU-na kukI maoM @yaa ilaKa hOÆ           221
          ‘fortune cookies’ mg kya likha hs?
          What’s written in the fortune cookie?
       10 BaartIya %yaaOhar.                          243
          bharatiya tyauhara
          Indian festivals


       Reference grammar                              259
       Key to exercises                               285
       Dictionary order                               308
       English–Hindi glossary                         309
       Hindi–English glossary                         328
       Index                                          343
Preface


Since the publication of this book over a decade ago, it has under-
gone several reprints. Nothing is more gratifying for an author than
to hear from his/her readers. I consider myself privileged to be the
beneficiary of my readers’ reactions, suggestions, compliments and
wish-lists which poured in from a highly diverse cross-section of
readers around the globe. This encouraged me to create a revised
and expanded version of the book. Based on the input that I have
received, I know it is not the ideal solution to the multitudes of
topics (ranging from the treatment of the Hindi script, grammatical
details and cross-cultural insights) that one wishes to address; how-
ever, it is a modest step toward that goal.
   Many changes have occurred since the first publication of the
book. India is fast becoming a major global power. The dynamics
of communicative situations further call for changes to reflect new
situations and realities. Readers will find the following new changes
and additions in this book:

• Facts and figures have been updated.
• The section dealing with the script has been beefed up considerably.
• Dialogues and prose texts integrate the Roman as well as the
  Devanagari in a way that reflects a mutually-feeding relationship
  between the two. As one of the anonymous reviewers of the book
  rightly noted, the execution of the Devanagari version of conversa-
  tions and prose texts was cumbersome in the first edition. This
  limitation has been addressed.
• Roman is a non-syllabic script whereas Devanagari is syllabic.
  Whenever relevant, the complementary strengths of the two writing
  systems are exploited, particularly in explanations of grammar.
• While the new guidelines issued by the Government of India
  have been followed throughout the book (e.g. the letter jha; pref-
  erence for e instead of ye in words such as cahie; not separating
  the postpositions with the pronouns), readers are also exposed to
x                                                                  Preface


        variation (e.g. two ways of writing the third person singular,
        polite imperative forms and the past tense).
    •   Whenever relevant, the content has been modernized.
    •   New topics of cross-cultural communication have been introduced
        in the cultural notes (e.g. how to say ‘no’ in socially sensitive
        situations, linguistic attitudes and hyper-politeness, etiquettes of
        gift-giving).
    •   Another innovation is the Online Resource Guide and the Internet
        links.
    •   Old errors and misprints have been corrected.

    In spite of this, I am acutely aware that this work is not free from
    limitations. Therefore, I would be grateful for any comments, criti-
    cisms or suggestions that perceptive scholars may have on this book.
    Please send them to me at the following address: Linguistic Studies
    Program, 312 HBC, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York-13244-
    1160, USA or send an email to: tkbhatia@syr.edu.
Acknowledgements


I am especially indebted to Sophie Oliver, Senior Editor, Language
Learning, for agreeing to consider and produce the new and revised
version of this book and for her commendable patience and encour-
agement. I am equally indebted to three anonymous reviewers for
their constructive and insightful input.
    I have contracted many debts in the process of writing this
book and its earlier edition. I am also grateful to my teachers
and colleagues, Yamuna and Braj Kachru who have taught me and
influenced me since my graduate school. I am also indebted to my
friends and colleagues Rajeshwari Pandharipande, James W. Gair,
Hans Hock, Meena and S.N. Sridhar, Rakesh Bhatt, Rajesh
Kumar, William C. Ritchie, Jaklin Kornfilt, Jennifer L. Smith, Vasu
Reganathan, Afroz Taj, Amer Bridger, Cassidy Perraeault and
Dr Mangat R. Bhardwaj, the author of the companion volume on
Punjabi, for their valuable discussions on matters of Hindi teach-
ing and linguistics. Finally, I also owe my thanks to Dr P.R.
Mehandiratta (Director General, American Institute of Indian
Studies, New Delhi) and to my colleagues at the South Asia Center,
Ann Gold, Jishnu Shankar and Susan Wadley, for their comments,
support and encouragement.
    My mother passed away before the first edition of this book
became a reality. This has left a permanent vacuum in my life. My
family migrated from the North West Frontier province close to the
Pakistan and Afghanistan border, so Hindi was my mother’s third
language and according to the value system of that time she never
had any formal schooling. During the writing of this book I remem-
bered how at the insistence of her children she learned to sign her
name in Hindi instead of using a thumb print as a signature. It is
still a mystery to me how and when she learned to read the Gita in
Hindi. I had thought there would still be a lot of time for us and that
these questions were not urgent. I was wrong. This work is especi-
ally dedicated to her memory.
xii                                                Acknowledgements


          I owe special thanks to my wife, Shobha, for her encouragement
      and support and to my daughter, Kanika, and my son, Ankit, who
      first inspired me to write this book so that they could learn Hindi.
      My special thanks are also due to my niece, Nandita. No words can
      express my deepest appreciation of my brothers in India for their
      constant support during my entire career.
          The pictures produced in this book were taken by the author as
      part of the ongoing collaborative project, Hindi OnLine, between
      Syracuse University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-
      Champaign and the University of Texas at Austin. The project is
      funded by a grant from the South Asia Research Center (SALRC),
      the University of Chicago and the US Department of Education.
      I gratefully acknowledge the support of Dr Steven M. Poulos,
      Director, SALRC, for making this work possible.
          My heartfelt thanks are also due to: Professor Omkar Koul for
      his technical assistance in the preparation of the manuscript and
      his perceptive comments; and to the College of Arts and Sciences’
      Dean Cathryn R. Newton, Associate Dean Dr Gerold Greeenberg
      and Dr Ben Ware, Vice President, Research and Computing, for
      their support of this work.
Introduction                                                                  1




BaUimaka
b humika
Introduction




A word to the learner
Welcome to Colloquial Hindi. Very often at social get-togethers in
the West, I am asked with utmost sincerity whether or not I speak
Hindu. Although I have no difficulty in understanding the real
intent of the question, unwittingly I find myself in an embarrassing
situation. This is particularly true if this inquiry happens to come
directly from my host. You see, Hindu is the name of the predomin-
ant religion in India and Nepal; Hindi is the name of the language
that is the lingua franca of South Asia.


About the language
Hindi is a modern Indo-Aryan language spoken in South Asian
countries (India, Pakistan, Nepal) and also in other countries out-
side Asia (Mauritius, Trinidad, Fiji, Surinam, Guyana, South Africa
and other countries). Approximately eight hundred million people
speak Hindi, as either a first (480 million) or second language. It is
the second most widely spoken language in the world. Along with
English, it is the official language of India. In addition, it is the state
language of Bihar, Chattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jarkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Also, I
should point out that Hindi is the language of Agra (the city of the
Taj Mahal).
   Hindi, which is a descendant of the Sanskrit language, is not
strictly the name of any chief dialect of the area but is an adjective,
Persian in origin, meaning Indian. Historically, it was synonymous
with Hindui, Hindawi, Rexta and Rexti. The terms Urdu and
Hindustani are also used to refer to this language. All these labels
2                                                               Introduction


    denote a mixed speech spoken around the area of Delhi, North India,
    which gained currency during the twelfth and thirteenth century as a
    contact language between the Arabs, Afghans, Persian and Turks,
    and native residents.
        Hindi is written in the Devanagari script which is ranked as the
    most scientific writing system among the existing writing systems
    of the world. The Devanagari script is written from left to right and
    is a descendant of the Brahmi script which was well established in
    India before 500 BC. The script is phonetic in nature and there is
    a fairly regular correspondence between the letters and their pro-
    nunciation. For more details see the section on the Hindi writing
    system and pronunciation.
        The literary history of Hindi goes back to the twelfth century.
    Some notable literary figures of Hindi are Kabir, Surdas and Tulsidas.
    The two notable linguistic features of the language are as follows:
    (1) Hindi still retains the original Indo-European (1500 BC) distinc-
    tion between aspirated and unaspirated consonants which results in
    a four-way contrast as shown by the following examples: kAl, ‘time’,
    k hAl, ‘skin’, gAl, ‘cheek’ and g hAl, ‘to put into’; (2) it has the feature
    of retroflexion in its consonant inventory, cf. TAl, ‘to put off’ and
    tAl, ‘pond’. The retroflex consonant is transcribed as the capital T.
    For more details see the section on the Hindi writing system and
    pronunciation.
        Hindi has an approximately three-century-old, well-attested and
    rich grammatical tradition of its own. It is a by-product of the colo-
    nial era and was born shortly after the arrival of Europeans in India.
    For a detailed treatment of this topic in general and the grammatical
    tradition in particular, see Bhatia (1987).


    About this book
    This book is designed as a complete first-year language course,
    keeping in mind the proficiency guidelines of the American Council
    on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) and the Euro-
    pean Language Community. Every attempt is made to optimize this
    goal by integrating the linguistic content with the culture of South
    Asia in general and India in particular. In fact, while teaching the
    language I have attempted to answer those questions that are often
    asked about the culture of India.
       In my professional life I have often witnessed the fact that
    the teaching of non-Western languages, including Hindi, is more
Introduction                                                              3


challenging in the West than the teaching of Western languages.
If you have experienced any of the following problems, this book
will enable you to achieve the goals described above:

• You sweat at the mere thought of learning a foreign language
  and/or foreign script.
• You think Hindi is a very difficult language to learn, so why
  try?
• You have some serious business, research interests or not-so-
  serious interests (such as travel) in India but you have been led
  to believe that everybody in India speaks English.
• You have learned Hindi from tools and settings which make
  native speakers laugh secretly or openly at your language use.
• India is culturally and linguistically so distant from the West that
  one cannot help but shy away from it.
• You haven’t heard of Bollywood movies.
• You consider French the only language fit for romance.

If you subscribe to one or all of the above, you are in for a surprise.
First, you might discover in the process of learning the language
that learning about Hindi is learning about one’s own roots. The
only difference is that European migration to India is perhaps the
oldest of all migrations from Europe, or vice versa as shown by recent
DNA research. For this reason, you will still find some striking
similarities between Hindi and English. For example, the Hindi word
for English ‘name’ is nam. The list goes on and on. The important
thing to know is that Hindi belongs to the Indo-European language
family and is similar to English in a number of ways. Learning to
note these similarities will make the process of learning this lan-
guage full of pleasant surprises.
   The book is grounded in the current theories of language acquisi-
tion, learnability and language use. Unlike other books (even some
of the latest ones), it never loses sight of the social–psychological
aspects of language use. In this book, I have not attempted to act
like a protector or saviour of language by engaging in linguistic
prescriptivism and puritanism. What you will find in this book is
how Hindi speakers use Hindi and communicate with each other in
meaningful ways. No attempt is made to translate the English word
artificially into Hindi if Hindi speakers treat the English word like
any other Hindi word. I was outraged when I noticed in a widely
circulated course on Hindi in which the waiter asks his customers
for their order, the word ‘order’ translated using the same verb as
4                                                             Introduction


    the English ‘obey my order!’ For more details see the section entitled
    ‘English Prohibition?’ in Unit 2.


    Beware . . .
    These prescriptivist tendencies defeat the real goal of learning a
    language in order to communicate with native speakers. Even some
    of the latest books on Hindi suffer from such problems and un-
    wittingly do a disservice to their learners because of their authors’
    lack of familiarity with the social–psychological dimensions of lan-
    guage use. I came across some examples in one of the most recent
    books on Hindi which teaches learners how to introduce themselves
    to native speakers. The sentences are grammatically correct but
    the author(s) fail to take into account the invisible dimension of
    the phenomenon of ‘turn taking’. For example, it is acceptable for
    English speakers to introduce themselves with a string of two clauses
    following the word ‘Hi’ (e.g. ‘Hi, my name is John and what is
    yours?’). However, the Hindi speaker will pause after the Hindi
    equivalent of ‘Hi’ and wait for the listener to respond with a greet-
    ing, and only after that will the Hindi speaker perform the task of
    telling his name and asking about his listener’s name. The failure
    to teach learners about ‘turn taking’ through naturalistic conversa-
    tions makes them run the risk of being seen as ‘pushy’ or ‘impatient’
    by native speakers. This book is particularly aware of such ‘non-
    linguistic’ or invisible dimensions of language use. Therefore, this
    book never loses sight of cross-cultural communication while teaching
    linguistic communication.
        This book deals with the four main linguistic skills:


                     receptive                       productive

    Aural–oral       listening comprehension         speaking comprehension
    Visual           reading comprehension           writing comprehension


    These skills are introduced in a manner consistent with the insights
    of modern Chomskyan linguistics. The learners are exposed to
    rules and discovery procedures, similar to those employed by native
    speakers, which enable them to generate an infinite number of sen-
    tences in their native language. Not only that, these rules enable native
Introduction                                                              5


speakers to generate new sentences they have never encountered
before (see Bhatia and Ritchie 2006 for details). This is the concep-
tual framework, combined with my twenty-five years of classroom
experience, which has gone into the makeup of this book. Unlike
other phrasebooks which emphasize parroting sentences without
gaining insight into the linguistic system, this book emphasizes and
serves as a catalyst to promote linguistic creativity and optimization.
This goal is achieved in a simple and unpretentious way avoiding
system overload.


How this book is organized
This book attempts to accommodate two types of learners: (1) those
who want to learn the language through the Hindi script called the
Devanagari script; and (2) those who wish to learn the language in
a relatively short period of time without the aid of the Devanagari
writing system (henceforth, Hindi script). Such pragmatic considera-
tions are an important feature of this book.
   The book begins with Hindi script and pronunciation. The main
body deals with ten conversational units which consist of the follow-
ing parts: (1) vocabulary; (2) dialogues with English translation;
(3) notes detailing pronunciation, grammar and usage relating to
the unit; and (4) exercises. The dialogues with ‘Tell me why?’ and
humour columns together with the notes explicitly deal with those
aspects of Indian culture about which I am most often asked. The
vocabulary or the new words used in the dialogues are given in
English and Devanagari script. You may wish to consult the voca-
bulary sections while doing exercises.
   The grammar summary gives an overview of the Hindi grammat-
ical tradition with full paradigms. This section complements the
section ‘Notes and grammar’ given in each lesson.
   The vocabulary section gives all the Hindi words used in the
dialogues. The words are listed alphabetically both in Hindi and
English. The basic vocabulary section classifies Hindi words into
different semantic groups.


How to use this book
This book focuses on two types of track: (1) for those learners who
want to adopt the English script path; and (2) for those who want
6                                                           Introduction


    to learn the Hindi script. Although learning Hindi script is highly
    recommended, if you decide to choose the first track, you can bypass
    the lessons on the writing system. For every learner, on both tracks,
    the lesson on the ‘Hindi writing system and pronunciation’ is a must
    and familiarity with the salient phonetic features of Hindi together
    with the ‘Transcription table’ is imperative. Please make sure that
    you learn the transcription of conversations, which differs from media
    convention. As shown in the transcription table, media convention
    is often broad and unsystematic. Examples of pronunciation are
    also recorded on the CD. The exercises with the audio icon are
    recorded on the CD. If you wish, you can refer to the listening
    exercises transcripts at the end of the book.
       If you are on the Hindi script track, you should start from script
    unit 1: you will learn Devanagari script in its printed as well as its
    handwritten form. Conversations and keys are given in Roman as
    well as in Hindi script. While working on the script units, you can
    make a start on the conversation units. There is an added incent-
    ive to consult the script units: their exercise sections give some of
    the most common expressions any visitor to India may need. They
    deal with situations such as customs and immigration, baggage, read-
    ing weather charts, making reservations, sending mail, gift-giving,
    annoying and cautionary settings, shopping, food, entertainment and
    renting.
       Naturally, you will need to memorize the vocabulary. The notes
    sections give you help on pronunciation, grammar and usage. Read-
    ing and learning these notes will stimulate your linguistic creativity.
       The reference grammar goes hand in hand with the grammatical
    notes given at the end of each dialogue. Answers to the exercises
    can be found in the key to exercises, in both Hindi and English
    scripts.


    Icons used in this book

    Icons are used throughout this book for several reasons, the most
    important of which is to draw attention to those sections that
    require careful reading.

    Audio Symbol        This symbol means that the corresponding exer-
                        cise requires the use of the CD that accompanies
                        this course.
Introduction                                                               7


Magic Key            Information next to this icon is critical for cre-
                     ativity and is worth memorizing.



Sherlock Holmes      This icon appears next to important examples
                     of regular usage, the understanding of which is
                     a primary source of creativity for the native
                     speakers.
Remember             This icon reminds you of material covered earlier.




Caution              The material marked by this icon deserves special
                     attention. It warns you about common mistakes
                     and sources of misunderstanding.


Web links            For additional practice or materials, web links
                     are provided.



The other icons used in the book are thematic in nature and should
prove self-explanatory.


Where to go from here
Of course, I do not pretend to teach you everything that needs to be
known about Hindi. Language learning can be a life-long venture if
you set your goals very high. Your next step is to look for books
offering the intermediate and advanced Hindi courses listed at the
end of the book. I give this information to alleviate the misconcep-
tion, quite widespread in the West, that there is a lack of inter-
mediate and advanced-level courses in Asian and African languages.
There is no shortage of material, in print or on the web, at these
levels. The only difficulty you might face is that this material will
invariably be in Hindi script. If that poses a problem for you, there
are still many ways you can continue to sharpen your linguistic
skills, the most important of which is Hindi films. India is the world’s
largest producer of films which are widely accessible in the East and
8                                                         Introduction


    the West on video and DVD. To develop a taste for Hindi films is
    most important in taking you to advanced Hindi language learning.
       Readers will find the following web resources useful. Please re-
    member, however, that the links may not always be active and that
    the content may change. The following links were active at the time
    of writing:

      http://www.latrobe.edu.au/indiangallery/hin11.htm
      http://www.ncsu.edu/project/hindi_lessons/

       Due to limitations of space, detailed descriptions of monuments
    such as the Taj Mahal could not be included in this book; for the
    sight and sounds of Indian monuments, lessons 2 and 9 from the
    www.ncsu.edu website are particularly recommended.

    For intermediate and advance readings, the following sites deserve
    attention:

      http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/plc/hindi/video/
      http://lrrc3.sas.upenn.edu/hindi_unicode/
      http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/Hindi/hindi.html
      http://munshi-premchand.blogspot.com/
      http://www.abhivyakti-hindi.org/
      http://www.anubhuti-hindi.org/

    Newspaper and media sites:

      http://www.bbc.co.uk/hindi/
      http://www.naidunia.com/

    Collection of Indian Newspaper sites:

      http://www.indiapress.org/index.php/Hindi/400x60

    Best wishes.


    Reference
    Bhatia, Tej K. 1987. A History of the Hindi Grammatical Tradition.
      Leiden: E.J. Brill.
    Bhatia, Tej K. and William C. Ritchie. 2006. Handbook of Bilingu-
      alism. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                     9




ihndI laoKna AaOr ]ccaarNa
hindc lekhan aur
uccaraN
Hindi writing system and
pronunciation




Introduction              (CD 1; 2)

This chapter briefly outlines the salient properties of Devanagari
script and Hindi pronunciation. Hindi is written in Devanagari script.
Even if you are not learning the script, this chapter is indispensable
because you need to know the pronunciation values of the Roman/
English letters used in the conversational units. Also, one or two
unfamiliar symbols are drawn from the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA). The transcription scheme followed here is widely
used in the teaching of Hindi and in Hindi language, literature and
linguistics. As I have said, the best way to learn Hindi is to learn the
script as well. However, if this is not possible due to consideration of
time, you will still need to refer to the transcription table until you
have mastered the letters and their pronunciation value.
   Listen to and repeat the pronunciation of Hindi vowels and con-
sonants together with their minimal pairs, recorded on the CD
accompanying this book.


Devanagari script
A number of languages are written in Devanagari script. Besides
Hindi, Nepali, Marathi and Sanskrit are also written in this script.
Other languages such as Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati use a slight vari-
ation of this script. This means that roughly half of humanity use
10                              Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     either this script or its close variant which follows the same under-
     lying organizational system.
         All scripts of Indic origin, including Devanagari script, are de-
     scendants of the Brahmi script which was well established some time
     before 500 BC in India. These scripts are considered the most scien-
     tific among the existing writing systems of the world for a number
     of reasons. (1) The arrangement and classification of the letters or
     symbols follow a system based on physiological or phonetic prin-
     ciples, namely the point and manner of articulation. Other writing
     systems, including the Roman system, employ arbitrary, random
     criteria to arrange and categorize the letters. (2) Each letter repres-
     ents one sound only (at least in most cases). For example, in English
     the [k] sound can be represented by the letters k, q, c and ch. This
     does not happen in Devanagari. Because of its scientific and pho-
     netic nature, this script has become the foundation of modern speech
     science and the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA.) The IPA is
     basically the romanized version of Devanagari script. As a result
     there is fairly regular correspondence between script and pronuncia-
     tion. In other words, the words are pronounced as they are written,
     and that is good news for our learners.
         Devanagari script is written from left to right and from the top of
     the page down, like Roman script. It does not distinguish between
     upper-case and the lower-case letters. It is syllabic in nature, i.e.
     every consonant letter/symbol represents the consonant plus the
     inherent vowel A a. The pronunciation of the inherent vowel is the
     major exception to the rule of correspondence between script and
     pronunciation. These exceptions are detailed in script unit 1 and script
     unit 4. Other minor exceptions are indicated by angular brackets < >
     with the words listed in the vocabulary of each unit.
         Below you will find Hindi vowel and consonant charts. In
     Devanagari vowels and consonants are listed separately because they
     involve distinct articulations.


     Hindi vowels
     Independent forms

       A      Aa     [     [-      ]     }     e     eo     Aao    AaO    ?
       a      a      i     c       u     e     e     s      o      au     ri
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                        11


Dependent forms: following a consonant

  ø      a       i        I       u        U       o       O   ao   aO    R
  a      a       i        c       u    e           e   s       o    au   ri

Notes on Hindi vowels

Hindi vowels do not distinguish between capital and non-capital.
However, they do distinguish between independent and dependent
forms. The independent forms are often called ‘the main’ or ‘full’
vowels, whereas the corresponding dependent forms are called
‘matra’ vowels and are connected to the preceding consonant.

Nasalization

In the production of a nasal vowel, a vowel is pronounced through
the mouth and the nose at the same time. Using either the symbol á
or M with the vowel indicates nasalization in Hindi. Long vowels are
usually nasalized in Hindi. In our transcription, the tilde symbol ˜
is used to indicate vowel nasalization, as in

  Aaá        k       }á       o       eá       q

The symbol M is used to indicate vowel nasalization when any stroke
of the vowel crosses the top horizontal line, as in eoM.

Diphthongs

eo s and AaO au are pronounced as a + i and a + u in the Eastern
variety of Hindi, but are pronounced as single vowels in Standard
Hindi. They receive dipthongal pronunciation only if they are fol-
lowed by y and w/v, respectively.
   ? ri does not occur in Hindi. It is used in the writing of a handful
of words which are borrowed by Hindi from Sanskrit.
12                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Hindi consonants

                Voiceless      Voiceless   Voiced        Voiced      Nasal
                unaspirated    aspirated   unaspirated   aspirated

     k-group    k              K           ga            Ga          =
                ka             kha         ga            gha         ra
     c-group    ca             C           ja            Ja          Ha
                ca             cha         ja            jh a        ña
     T-group    T              z           D             Z           Na
                Ta             Th a        Da            Dha         Na
     t-group    t              qa          d             Qa          na
                ta             th a        da            dha         na
     p-group    p              f           ba            Ba          ma
                pa             Ph a        ba            bha         ma
     Others     ya             r           la            va          Sa
                ya             ra          la            wa/va       sha
                Ya             sa          h
                SHa            sa          ha
                D,             Z,
                Ra             Rha


     Sanskrit letters used infrequently:   xa ksha ~ tra & gya

     Notes on Hindi consonants

     The first five groups of consonants are called stops because they are
     pronounced by stopping outgoing air from the mouth. The fifth
     column of these five groups of consonants is called nasal because the
     air is released through the nose while it is stopped from the mouth.
     The nasal consonants of the first two groups, i.e. = ra and Ha ña are
     never used in their syllabic form in Hindi, so you will not find them
     in this book. They are included here because they are part of the
     traditional Devanagari consonant chart.

     Place of articulation

     All consonants arranged within each of the five groups share the
     same place of articulation, as described below:
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                   13


k-vaga- k-group
These consonants are also called ‘velar’ because the back of the
tongue touches the back of the soft palate, called the velum. They
are similar to the English k and g.

  k       K        ga     Ga       =
  ka      kha      ga     gha      ra

ca-vaga- c-group
These sounds are the closest equivalent to the English sound ch in
‘church.’ The main body of the tongue touches the hard palate in
the articulation of these sounds.

  ca      C        ja     Ja       Ha
  ca      cha      ja     jha      ña

T-vaga- T-group (the ‘capital T group’)
  T       z        D      Z        Na
  Ta      Tha      Da     Dha      Na

These consonants represent the most colourful features of the lan-
guages of the Indian subcontinent. They are also called ‘retroflex’
consonants. There is no equivalent of these sounds in English. In the
articulation of these sounds, the tip of the tongue is curled back and
the underside of the tongue touches the hard palate. The following
diagram can help in the production of these sounds:




Note that D, R and Z, Rh are also pronounced with the same point of
articulation.
14                               Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     t-vaga- t-group
     The tip of the tongue touches the back of the teeth, and not the gum
     ridge behind the teeth as is the case in the pronunciation of the
     English t or d.

       t      qa        d        Qa      na
       ta     th a      da       dha     na

     Study the following diagrams carefully in order to distinguish Hindi
     t-group of sounds from the English t-group of sounds.




                     English                           Hindi


     p-vaga- p-group
     These sounds are similar to English p or b sounds. They are pro-
     nounced by closing or nearly closing the lips.

       p       f            ba     Ba         ma
       pa      pha          ba     bha        ma

     Manner of articulation

     All columns in the five groups involve the same manner of articulation.

     Voiceless unaspirated

       k       ca       T         t      p
       ka      ca       Ta        ta     pa
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                      15


These sounds are like the English k (as in ‘skin’ but not as in ‘kin’),
p (as in ‘spin’ but not as in ‘pin’). In ‘kin’ and ‘pin’, the English
sounds k and p are slightly aspirated, i.e. they are followed by a
slight ‘puff of air’. In order to pronounce the corresponding Hindi k
and p, you need to reduce the flow of breath.

Voiceless aspirated

   K       C         z          qa          f
   kha     cha       Tha        tha         pha

The superscripted h means that these sounds are pronounced with a
strong ‘puff of air’. All you have to do is to increase the air flow
slightly in the pronunciation of the English k and p sounds.

Voiced unaspirated

   ga     ja     D         d          ba
   ga     ja     Da        da         ba

In the production of these sounds the vocal cords vibrate and
produce a buzzing sound, like that of a bee. You should have no
difficulty producing these sounds as they are like English g and b.

Voiced aspirated (breathy voiced)

If you pronounce voiced unaspirated consonants with a ‘puff of
air’, you will produce voiced aspirated sounds. The superscripted h
indicates the presence of the ‘puff of air’. If this seems difficult, try
pronouncing the voiced unaspirated consonants with an h (as in
hog-hog). If you pronounce the words fast enough, you will obtain
the voiced aspirate g h at the end of the first break between the two
words.

   Ga      Ja        Z          Qa          Ba
   gha     jha       Dha        dha         bha

Nasal

   =      Ha      Na       na          ma
   ra     ña      Na       na          ma
16                              Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     These sounds are similar to English nasal consonants such as n and
     m. The velar and palatal nasals are similar to the nasal consonants
     in the English words ‘king’ and ‘bunch’, respectively.

     ya-h vaga- Other consonants (miscellaneous)
     The following consonants grouped together as ‘others’ are very
     similar to English sounds, so do not call for detailed phonetic
     description. The English transcription is sufficient to give you
     information about their pronunciation.

       ya       r       la      va                 Sa       sa   h
       ya       ra      la      wa/va              sha      sa   ha

     As mentioned above, the following two consonants are pronounced
     with a curled tongue. However, the underside of the tongue is flapped
     forward quickly, touching the hard palate slightly, instead of articu-
     lating the stop with the hard palate. Z, Rha is the aspirated counter-
     part of D, Ra.

       D,        Z,
       Ra        Rha

     Sanskrit letters
     The following four consonants are from Sanskrit. They do not exist
     in Hindi except in the handful of words borrowed from Sanskrit.

       Ya SHa         xa ksha        ~ tra          & gya
     Ya SHa is pronounced like Sa sha, and the other three letters represent
     consonant clusters in Hindi.

     Borrowed Perso-Arabic and English sounds
     By placing a dot under the following five consonant symbols, the
     five Perso-Arabic sounds are represented:

       f,       j,a     K,      k,           g,a
       fa       za      xa      qa           Ga

     Out of these five, the first two are used quite frequently in Hindi.
     The reason for this is that fa and za are also found in English. The
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                                  17


other three consonants are usually pronounced as kha, ka and ga,
respectively. Even the first two sounds fa and za can be pronounced
as pha and ja, respectively.
   It should be noted that English alveolar sounds t and d are usu-
ally perceived and written as T and D, respectively. So the t and d
in the proper name ‘Todd’ are written with the letters T and D,
respectively.


Pronunciation practice
Minimal pair practice                           (CD 1; 3)

Vowels
Oral vowels

Vowel       Pronunciation cue                        Hindi words
            (English near-equivalent)

A      a    about                                    kla    kal   yesterday/tomorrow
Aa     a    father                                   kala   kal   time, tense
[      i    sit                                      idna   din   day
[-     c    seat                                     dIna   dcn   poor
]      u    book                                     kula   kul   total, family
}      e    boot, loot                               kUla   kel   shore
e      e    late, date (without a glide)             hoo    he    hey
eo     s    bet                                      hO     hs    is
Aao    o    boat (without a glide)                   Aaor   or    side, towards
AaO    au   bought                                   AaOr   aur   and


Nasalized vowels á M

Nasalized vowels (long)                    Hindi words

Aaá    k                                   maaáM      mk      mother
[- M   m                                   khIM       kahm    somewhere
}á     o                                   hUá        ho      am
eá     g                                   maMo       mg      in
eoM    q                                   maOOOoM    mq      I
AaMo   õ                                   gaaoMd     gõd     gum
AaOM   ãj                                  caaMOk     cãjk    be alarmed, be startled
18                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Minimal pair practice: words with oral and
     nasalized vowels

     Oral vowels                     Nasalized vowels

     Aa a kha kaha said (m.sg)       Aaá k khaá kahk where
     [- c khI kahc said (f.sg)       [M- m khIM kahm somewhere
     } e pUC pech ask                }á o pUáC poch a tail
     e e lao le        take          eá g laoM lg        take (optative)
     eo s hO hs        is            eoM q hOM hq        are
     Aao o gaaod god the lap         AaoM õ gaaoMd gõd gum
     AaO au caaOk cauk a crossing    AaOM ãj caaOMk cãjk be alarmed, be startled


     Consonants              (CD 1; 4)

     Listen to the recording and repeat the words.

     Remember, the contrasts shown below are very critical in Hindi.
     Failing to maintain such contrasts will result in a breakdown of
     communication. If you want to ask for food, Kanaa khana failing to
     aspirate will result in saying kanaa kana and you will end up asking for
     a one-eyed person. Similarly, if you do not distinguish the T-group
     of consonants from the t-group of consonants, rather than asking
     for raoTI roTc, ‘bread’, you will end up reporting that the girl is crying
     (i.e. raotI rotc).

     Minimal pair practice: words with unvoiced
     unaspirated stops and unvoiced aspirated stops

     Unvoiced unaspirated                            Unvoiced aspirated

     k ka    kala kal   time                         K kha    Kala khal    skin
     ca ca   cala cal   walk                         C cha    Cla chal     cheat
     T Ta    Tala Tal   postpone                     z Tha    zala Thal    sit idle
     t ta    tana tan   tune                         qa tha   qaala thal   plate
     p pa    pla pal    moment                       f pha    fla phal     fruit
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                            19


Minimal pair practice: words with voiced
unaspirated stops and voiced aspirated stops

Voiced unaspirated                 Voiced aspirated

ga ga   gaa ga      sing           Ga gha   Gaa gha  the fourth letter of the
                                                       k-series
ja ja   jala jal    water          Ja jha Jala jhal fan
D Da    Dala Dal    a branch       Z Dha Zala Dhal shield
d da    dana dan    charity        Qa dha Qaana dhan paddy
ba ba   baala bal   hair           Ba bha Baala bhal forehead


Minimal pair practice: words with unvoiced
aspirated stops and voiced aspirated stops

Unvoiced aspirated                      Voiced aspirated

K kha Kanaa khana food                  Ga gha Gaanaa ghana Ghana, the name
                                                                 of a country
C cha Cla chal        cheat             Ja jha Jala jhal       fan
z Tha zk Thak         tapping sound     Z Dha Zk Dhak          cover
qa tha qaana than     roll of cloth     Qa dha Qaana dhan      paddy
f pha fUla phel       flower            Ba bha BaUla bhel      mistake


Minimal pair practice: words with the T-group
(retroflex) stops and the t-group (dental) stops

T-vaga- T-group                              t-vaga- t-group
T Ta     Tala Tal     postpone               t ta     tala tal    pond
Z Tha    zk Thak      tapping (sound)        qa tha   qak thak    be tired
D Da     Dala Dal     branch                 d da     dala dal    lentil
Z Dha    Zk Dhak      cover                  Qa dha   Qak dhak    palpitation,
                                                                     excitement

Listen to the following:
20                          Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     Nasal consonants

     Nasal consonant                                  Hindi word

     = ra                                             AMga arg     body, limb
     Ha ña                                            AMjaU añje   female name
     Na Na                                            baaNa baN    arrow
     na na                                            naana nan    bread
     ma ma                                            maana man    respect


     Other consonants

     Listen to the following words:

     Consonant                                     Hindi word

     ya ya                                         yaar yar     friend
     r ma                                          rajaa raja   king
     la la                                         laala lal    red
     va wa/va                                      vaar var     an attack
     Sa sha                                        Saala shal   shawl
     sa sa                                         saala sal    year
     h ha                                          hala hal     condition, state


     Minimal pair practice: words with r, R and Rh

     Consonant                                          Hindi word

     r ra                                               pr par on, at
     D, Ra                                              pD, paR lie, fall
     Z, Rha                                             pZ, paRh read, study


     Borrowed consonants

        f,       j,a   K,    k,       g,a
        fa       za    xa    qa       Ga

     As pointed out earlier, these consonants were not present in Hindi
     originally. Many speakers of Hindi still substitute the closest corres-
     ponding Hindi consonant for them, as shown below:
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                                  21


   f,,     fa         becomes             f        pha
   j,a     za         becomes             ja       ja
   K,      xa         becomes             K        kha
   k,,     qa         becomes             k        ka
   ga,     Ga         becomes             ga       ga

In other words, the dots are added to the native symbols to rep-
resent the borrowed sounds.
   Now listen to the two possible pronunciations of the following
words.

Consonant Word                                                   Consonant Word

f, fa    f,Isa f cs      tuition, fee                            f pha   fIsa phcs
ja, za   ja,ra zara      just, a little                          ja ja   jara jara
K, xa    K,rId xarcd     buy                                     K kha   KrId kharcd
k, qa    k,lama qalam    pen                                     k ka    klama kalam
ga, Ga   ga,rIba Garcb   poor                                    ga ga   garIba garcb

Syllables, stress and intonation: see Script Unit 5.


   Punctuation marks

   With the exception of the full stop, which is represented by the
   sign ., Hindi uses the same punctuation marks as English. For
   abbreviation purposes, a small circle • is used after the first
   syllable. For example, pM• stands for Pandit. Sometimes the sign ^
   is used over the vowel Aa a to represent the English sound o, as
   in jaa^na ‘John’ and yaa^k- ‘York’.



Numerals


   1       2      3       4       5            6     7   8   9       0

If you do not have the recording, either skip the following section or
seek the assistance of a native speaker.
22                            Hindi writing system and pronunciation


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1          (CD 1; 5)

     Listen to each group of three words and circle the word that is
     different.

                                  A     B       C
                                  kr    Kr      kr
         Example: you hear        kar   khar    kar
         Answer:                        B

     1   A     B     C
     2   A     B     C
     3   A     B     C
     4   A     B     C
     5   A     B     C


     Exercise 2          (CD 1; 6)

     Listen to each group of four words and circle the aspirated words.

                                  A     B       C       D
                                  kr    Kr      gar     Gar
         Example: you hear:       kar   khar    gar     ghar
         Answer:                        B, D

     1   A     B     C        D
     2   A     B     C        D
     3   A     B     C        D
     4   A     B     C        D
     5   A     B     C        D

     Exercise 3          (CD 1; 7)

     Listen to pairs of words contrasting the T-group (retroflex) and the
     t-group of consonants.

         A           B
         iTk Tik     itk tik
Hindi writing system and pronunciation                                 23


After each pair has been pronounced, you will hear either ‘A’ or ‘B’
again. Underline the word that you hear this time.

    Example: you hear iTk Tik, then underline Tik.

1   tak     tak         Tak     Tak
2   qak     thak        zk      Thak
3   daga    dag         Daga    Dag
4   Qak     dhak        Zk      Dhak
5   Par     par         PaD,    paR
6   sar     sar         saD,    saR
7   krI     karc        kZ,I    kaRh c
8   qaIk    th ck       zIk     Th ck

Exercise 4                   (CD 1; 8)

Listen to pairs of words with constrasting vowel sounds.

    A               B
    idna din        dIna dcn
After each pair has been pronounced, you will hear either ‘A’ or ‘B’
again. Underline the word that you hear this time.

    Example: you hear dIna dcn, then underline dcn.

    A                B
1   kala    kal      kla       kal
2   idna    din      dIna      dcn
3   imala   mil      maIla     mcl
4   cauk    cuk      caUk      cek
5   maola   mel      maOla     msl
6   saor    ser      saOr      ssr
7   ibana   bin      baIna     bcn
8   baala   bal      bala      bal
24                                                             Transcription table




     Transcription table

     If you wish to learn Hindi principally via the Roman/English path
     or if you are used to seeing Hindi words in the English or Bollywood
     media, you might find the transcription of Hindi words a little odd
     or unfamiliar at first. However, a quick glance will reveal that media
     transcription is usually very broad, ambiguous and inconsistent.
     English–Hindi bilinguals/native speakers can cope with such trans-
     cription because they know the target word. Foreign learners do not
     have this advantage.
        It is imperative that learners make themselves familiar with the
     scientific transcription used in this book – SALT, the transcription
     system widely used in South Asian language and literature. Such
     familiarity is critical to avoiding mishaps in communication and
     to increase learning efficiency: see the section entitled ‘Hindi writing
     system and pronunciation’ for details. The table below provides you
     with a convenient source of reference for Hindi sounds.

     Letter         SALT (South                     Media      As in English words
     (Devanagari)   Asian Language
                    Transcription)

     Vowels

     A              a                               uh/a       about
     Aa             a                               aa/ah/a    father
     [              i                               i/e        sit
     [-             c                               ee         seat
     ]              u                               u          book
     }              e                               oo/u       boot, loot
     e              e                               ay/e       late, date (without
                                                                   a glide)
     eo             s (ai)                          ai/aye     bet
     Aao            o                               o          boat (without a glide)
     AaO            au                              au         bought
     Nasal vowels   (e.g. ã, h, k, m . . . ); see    vowel +
                       ‘Hindi writing system           n/m
                       and pronunciation’
Transcription table                                                                 25


Letter           SALT (South                  Media      As in English words
(Devanagari)     Asian Language
                 Transcription)

Consonants

k                ka                           ka/ca      back
K                k ha                         kha/ka     cat
ga               ga                           ga         gate
Ga               g ha                         gha        hog-hog
=                ra                           na         king
ca               ca                           cha        church
C                c ha                         chha       church (with slight puff
                                                           of air)
ja               ja                           ja         jug
Ja               j ha                         jha/ja     hedge-hog
Ha               ña                           na         bunch
T                Ta                           ta         Not in English: see
z                Tha                          t ha         ‘Hindi writing system
D/D,             Da/Ra                        da/da        and pronunciation’
Z/Z,             Dha/Rha                      dha/da
Na               Na                           na
t                ta                           ta         cat
qa               t ha                         t ha       tin
d                da                           da         dog
Qa               d ha                         dha        dharma
na               na                           na         nab
p                pa                           pa         zip
f/f,             p ha                         pha        Pat
ba               ba                           ba         bat
Ba               b ha                         bha        tab-let
ma               ma                           ma         mat
ya               ya                           ya         yes
r                ra                           ra         rat
la               la                           la         late
va               wa/va                        wa/va      vat
Sa               sha                          sha        she
Ya               SHa                          SHa        Like retroflex; not in
                                                             English
sa               sa                           sa         sit
h                ha                           ha         hat

Source: Adapted from Bhatia, Tej K. (2000). Advertising in Rural India: Language,
Marketing Communication and Consumerism. Tokyo: Institute for the Study of
Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.
26                                         Transcription table


     A sample of transcriptional variation

     Media              SALT

     Mahabharat         Mahabharata ‘Sanskrit epic’
     Ramayan            ramayaNa ‘Sanskrit epic’
     gharana            gharana ‘lineage’
     akashvani          akashvaNc ‘radio’
     doordarshan        derdharshan ‘television’
     beedi, beeri       bcRc ‘native cigarette’
     Chaay              cay ‘tea’
     Chaarpay           carpac ‘a string bed with four wooden legs’
     Amitabh Bachhan    Amitabh Baccan (famous actor)
Script unit 1            27




ilaip AaOr laoKna
lipi aur lekhan
Script and handwriting
Script unit 1                                                               29




1 phlaa paz – ilaip
  pshla paTh – lipi
          Script unit 1




The first letter of the Devanagari script is A a.
   When the preceding sound is a consonant, it is inherent in the
consonant, so it is not written separately (as in the Hindi word
pr par ‘on/at’). In all other situations, however, it is written separ-
ately (e.g. Aba ab ‘now’).
   Look at the following combinations of consonants with the vowel
A a and try to read them aloud first. You may need to refer to the
consonant chart in the transcription table.


Letters                   Word                             Pronunciation

p         +   r     =     pr
pa        +   ra    =     para     on/at                   par
A         +   ba    =     Aba
a         +   ba    =     aba      now                     ab
k         +   la    =     kla
ka        +   la    =     kala     yesterday/tomorrow      kal


   Note that with a preceding p, r, b, k or l the independent shape of
the vowel A is not used. In such cases the vowel is absorbed into the
consonant. It is for this reason that Hindi script is called a ‘syllabic’
script, i.e. a consonant letter such as k stands for k + a. Each con-
sonant letter is not written separately, as is the case with the Roman
script. So, k + a cannot be written as k + A. Of course, there are
ways to write a consonant without a vowel; we will learn to do this
at a later stage.
   If you thought that the vowel -a at the end of a word is absorbed
into the preceding consonant, but is not pronounced (i.e. silent) in
Standard Hindi speech, you would be right. So, a word written as
30                                                            Script unit 1


     pr para ‘on/at’ is actually pronounced as par. Some dialects of Hindi
     do not drop the word-final a in pronunciation.
        Combinations of three or more consonants follow the same
     pattern.


     Letters                               Word                Pronunciation

     sa        +   D,   +    k         =   saD,k
     sa        +   Ra   +    ka        =   saRakx      road    saRak
     ma        +   ga   +    r         =   magar
     ma        +   ga   +    ra        =   magarx      but     magar
     A         +   ga   +    r         =   Agar
     a         +   ga   +    ra        =   agarx       if      agar




     Handwriting

     Stroke order

     Letter/            Stroke order          Head stroke/      Handwriting
     Pronunciation                            Head bar


     k – vaga-
     k ka
     Kka  h


     ga ga
     Ga g a
          h




     ca – vaga-
     ca ca
     C ca h


     ja ja
     Ja j a
          h
Script unit 1                                               31


Letter/         Stroke order   Head stroke/   Handwriting
Pronunciation                  Head bar


T – vaga-
T Ta
z Ta    h


D Da
Z Da    h


Na Na
t – vaga-
t ta
qa t a
    h


d da
Qa d a
    h


na na
p – vaga-
p pa
fpa h


ba ba
Ba b a
    h


ma ma
ya – h vaga-
ya ya
r ra
la la
va va
Sa sha
Ya SHa
32                                                              Script unit 1


     Letter/                 Stroke order        Head stroke/     Handwriting
     Pronunciation                               Head bar

     sa sa
     h ha
     saMskRt
     xa ksha
     ~ tra
     & gya/jya
     Anya Other retroflex letters
     Dº Ra
     Zº R a h




     Observation exercise
     Similar-looking characters
       Ga       gha    Qa   dha
       K        kha    r    ra        va wa/va
       ba       ba     va   wa/va
       Ba       bha    ma   ma
       d        da     D    Da        Z Dha          D, Ra      Z, Rha
       qa       t ha   ya   ya


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1
     Read aloud the Hindi words given below. Feel free to consult the
     consonant chart in the transcription table. However, resist the
     temptation to transcribe and write every letter before you pronounce
     the word. Treat this as an exercise in simple arithmetic addition. The
     difference is that you have words rather than numbers here.
Script unit 1                                                                 33


  You can compare your pronunciation against the recording, if
you have it.

1 Amana 2 Asala 3 jalana 4 klama 5 kmala 6 garma 7 jaba 8 kba 9 tba 10 saba

Exercise 2

Identify and transcribe the following letters. Also, observe some
similarities between these letters.

    k      ya      qa     t    Ga    Qa    Ba     ma    va    ba

Exercise 3

Write the following in the Devanagari alphabet.

1   kha, ra, wa/va
2   Ta, ta, Tha, tha
3   da, Da, dha, Dha
4   pa, pha, ba, ya
5   ra, Ra, Rha

Exercise 4

Write the following words in Hindi script. Assume that the word-
final vowel a is dropped.

1 kaT           2 gal     3 cal      4 namak        5 sabak        6 parakh
7 sadar         8 calan   9 man     10 pal         11 garam


    Web resources
    For the dynamics of stroke order, see Syracuse University’s
    Hindi web page:
        http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/jishnu/101/alphabet/
          default.asp?section=0
    The following link is also recommended:
        http://www.avashy.com/hindiscripttutor.htm
34                                                         Script unit 2




     2 dUsara paz – ilaip
       desra paTh – lipi
              Script unit 2




     In Script Unit 1, we learnt how to use the independent form of short
     A a and about its absorption into the preceding consonant.
        Now, let us learn to combine dependent forms of more vowel
     symbols. The independent and dependent forms (maa~a matra) of Hindi
     vowels are given below:



     Independent          Dependent (maa~a mAtrA)      Position
                          ‘Following a consonant’

     A a                  0 (zero)
     Aa a                 a                            after a consonant
     [ i                  i                            before a consonant
     [- c                 I                            after a consonant
     ] u                     u                         under a consonant
     } e                   U                           under a consonant
     e e                     o                         top of a consonant
     eo s                    O                         top of a consonant
     Aao o                ao                           after a consonant
     AaO au               aO                           after a consonant



     Now let us consider the following three dependent vowel symbols:

        a     long    a
        i     short   i
        I     long    c

     As mentioned above, a and I are placed after a consonant, whereas
     i is placed before a consonant, as shown below:
Script unit 2                                                                       35


    ga   + a                       k + I                        k   + i
    ga + a                         ka + c                       ka + i
      gaa ga                         kI kc                        ik ki
Notice when a dependent form of the vowel is adjoined to a con-
sonant, the invisible short A a is actually absorbed. As mentioned in
script unit 1, the word-final short a is silent.

    baa  + t                       ba          + ta             tI       + na
   ba + ta                         ba          + ta             tc       + na
     baat bat                             bata bata                   tIna tcn
  thing, matter                              tell                     three

Now look at the following examples:

    baa+          rI               ca        + naa              iga     +      ra
    ba +          rc               ca        + na               gi      +      ra
          baarI                             canaa                      igara
          turn                     chick pea                           fell

Observe the following three-syllable words:

  k       + ha                 + naI           khanaI story
  ka      + ha                 + nc

  ma + saa                     + laa           masaalaa spice
  ma + sa                      + la

  ik      + Qa                 + r             ikQar where, which direction
  ki      + dha                + ra

  kI      + ma                 + t             kImat price
  kc      + ma                 + ta

Now let us turn our attention to the next four dependent vowel
forms.

      u      U             o          O
   u        e          e          s

These vowel symbols are either placed above or below a consonant
symbol, as shown here:
36                                                            Script unit 2


       tu            tU         to         tO
       tu            te         te         ts

     Read the following words. (In what follows the absence of the word-
     final short a is assumed.)

       cau       +        k     =    cauk            finish
       cu        +        ka         cuk

       pU        +        C     = pUC                ask
       pe        +        cha   = pech

       jao       +        la    = jaola              jail
       je        +        la    = jel

       pO        +        saa   = pOsaa              money
       ps        +        sa    = pssa


       Exceptions
       When u and U are joined to r ra, they are joined to the middle
       joint of the r, as shown below:
             r   +        u          r    +      e
             r + u                   r + U


                 É                         $


     It is incorrect to place u and U below the r as in ru ru and rU re.
         Also, notice the difference in the shape of u. With r the symbol of
     the dependent vowel u becomes º
         Now here are the last two dependent vowel forms:

       ao            aO
       o         au

     They are placed to the right of a consonant like a and c, as shown
     below:

       Cao       + Ta =                  CaoTa       small
       cho       + Ta
Script unit 2                                                                                            37


      caaO        + k          =   caaOk             crossing
      cau         + k

Observe some more examples of the vowels in question:

      p           + D,aO       + saI =               pD,aOsaI           neighbour
      pa          + rau        + sc

      haO         + sa         + laa =               haOsalaa           courage
      hau         + sa         + la

      paO         + Saa        + k         =         paOSaak            dress
      pao         + sha        + k

      ina         + caao       + D,        =         inacaaoD,          squeeze, essence
      ni          + co         + R

The use of maa~a matra vowels with preceding consonants is shown
below. The consonants that never occur with matra vowels are not
listed here.


k            ka         ik         kI          ku                kU        ko     kO       kao    kaO
ka           ka         ki         kc          ku                ke        ke     ks       ko     kau
K            Ka         iK         KI          Ku                KU        Ko     KO       Kao    KaO
kha          kha        khi        khc         khu               khe       khe    khs      kho    khau
ga           gaa        iga        gaI         gau               gaU       gao    gaO      gaao   gaaO
ga           ga         gi         gc          gu                ge        ge     gs       go     gau
Ga           Gaa        iGa        GaI         Gau               GaU       Gao    GaO      Gaao   GaaO
gha          gha        ghi        ghc         ghu               ghe       ghe    ghs      gho    ghau

ca           caa        ica        caI         cau               caU       cao    caO      caao   caaO
ca           ca         ci         cc          cu                ce        ce     cs       co     cau
C            Ca         iC         CI          Cu                CU        Co     CO       Cao    CaO
cha          cha        chi        chc         chu               che       che    chs      c ho   chau
ja           jaa        ija        jaI         jau               jaU       jao    jaO      jaao   jaaO
ja           ja         ji         jc          ju                je        je     js       jo     jau
Ja           Jaa        iJa        JaI         Jau               JaU       Jao    JaO      Jaao   JaaO
jha          jha        jhi        jhc         jhu               jhe       jh e   jhs      jho    jhau

T            Ta         iT         TI          Tu                TU        To     TO       Tao    TaO
Ta           Ta         Ti         Tc          Tu                Te        Te     Ts       To     Tau
z            za         iz         zI          zu                zU        zo     zO       zao    zaO
Th a         Th a       Th i       Thc         Thu               Th e      Th e   Th s     Th o   Thau
38                                                          Script unit 2


     D      Da     iD     DI    Du     DU     Do     DO      Dao    DaO
     Da     Da     Di     Dc    Du     De     De     Ds      Do     Dau
     Z      Za     iZ     ZI    Zu     ZU     Zo     ZO      Zao    ZaO
     Dha    Dha    Dhi    Dhc   D hu   Dhe    Dhe    Dhs     Dho    Dhau
     Na     Naa    iNa    NaI   Nau    NaU    Nao    NaO     Naao   NaaO
     Na     Na     Ni     Nc    Nu     Ne     Ne     Ns      No     Nau
     t      ta     it     tI    tu     tU     to     tO      tao    taO
     ta     ta     ti     tc    tu     te     te     ts      to     tau
     qa     qaa    iqa    qaI   qau    qaU    qao    qaO     qaao   qaaO
     th a   th a   th i   thc   th u   th e   th e   th s    th o   thau
     d      da     id     dI    du     dU     do     dO      dao    daO
     da     da     di     dc    du     de     de     ds      do     dau
     Qa     Qaa    iQa    QaI   Qau    QaU    Qao    QaO     Qaao   QaaO
     dha    dha    dhi    dhc   dhu    dhe    dhe    dhs     dho    dhau
     na     naa    ina    naI   nau    naU    nao    naO     naao   naaO
     na     na     ni     nc    nu     ne     ne     ns      no     nau
     p      pa     ip     pI    pu     pU     po     pO      pao    paO
     pa     pa     pi     pc    pu     pe     pe     ps      po     pau
     f      fa     if     fI    fu     fU     fo     fO      fao    faO
     pha    pha    phi    phc   phu    phe    phe    phs     pho    phau
     ba     baa    iba    baI   bau    baU    bao    baO     baao   baaO
     ba     ba     bi     bc    bu     be     be     bs      bo     bau
     Ba     Baa    iBa    BaI   Bau    BaU    Bao    BaO     Baao   BaaO
     bha    bha    bhi    bhc   bhu    bhe    bhe    bhs     bho    bhau
     ma     maa    ima    maI   mau    maU    mao    maO     maao   maaO
     ma     ma     mi     mc    mu     me     me     ms      mo     mau
     ya     yaa    iya    yaI   yau    yaU    yao    yaO     yaao   yaaO
     ya     ya     yi     yc    yu     ye     ye     ys      yo     yau
     r      ra     ir     rI    É      $      ro     rO      rao    raO
     ra     ra     ri     rc    ru     re     re     rs      ro     rau
     la     laa    ila    laI   lau    laU    lao    laO     laao   laaO
     la     la     li     lc    lu     le     le     ls      lo     lau
     va     vaa    iva    vaI   vau    vaU    vao    vaO     vaao   vaaO
     va     va     vi     vc    vu     ve     ve     vs      vo     vau
     Sa     Saa    iSa    SaI   Sau    SaU    Sao    SaO     Saao   SaaO
     sha    sha    shi    shc   shu    she    she    shs     sho    shau
     Ya     Yaa    iYa    YaI   Yau    YaU    Yao    YaO     Yaao   YaaO
     SHa    SHa    SHi    SHc   SHu    SHe    She    SHs     SHo    SHau
     sa     saa    isa    saI   sau    saU    sao    saO     saao   saaO
     sa     sa     si     sc    su     se     se     ss      so     sau
     h      ha     ih     hI    hu     hU     ho     hO      hao    haO
     ha     ha     hi     hc    hu     he     he     hs      ho     hau
Script unit 2                                                                     39


The horizontal bar/head stroke and words

The horizontal bar is placed on a word. Thus kam k a ma = kama but
not ka ma.


AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1

Read the following Hindi words aloud and transcribe them. Note
that your transcription should take into account the word-final
absence of the short vowel A a.

 1 BaarI    2 baD,a    3 iktnaa 4 kalaa      5 Baart         6 gaaD,I 7 iknaara
 8 gaIt     9 gaayaba 10 caavala 11 caahnaa 12 icaiD,yaaGar 13 j,ara 14 jaIvana
15 jaapana 16 caaor 17 maaor     18 fla     19 BaUt         20 caaOqaa 21 DaOla
22 puilasa 23 haqaI 24 isatar 25 Saama


Exercise 2

Write the following words in Devanagari script:

 1 jabki 2 kc        3 bazar    4 raja    5 ranc 6 pahacan
 7 nac    8 banaras 9 kanapur 10 mata    11 pita 12 kabhc
13 milan 14 zamcn 15 kar       16 mahcna 17 sal 18 din
19 car   20 sat     21 savera  22 cay    23 panc 24 pati
25 bhale 26 rat     27 dopahar 28 khol   29 sau 30 sona


Exercise 3

Practise writing the following names:

1 Richard     2 Bill   3 Sarah (seyra)     4 Jennifer     5 Don


Exercise 4

The following words are written incorrectly in Hindi. Look at their
transcription and write their correct form in Hindi:
40                                                     Script unit 2


     Correct   Incorrect   Correct   Correct   Incorrect     Correct

     rupaya    rupyaa                Dar       dr
     rekha     rUKa                  nam       naaBa
     kar       kAr                   than      Qaana
     ki        ki                    ghar      Qar
     aur       Aar                   Dal       D,ala
Script unit 3                                                               41




3 tIsara paz – ilaip
  tcsra paTh – lipi
          Script unit 3




Independent vowels
In this unit we will learn how to use independent vowel forms and
nasalized vowels. In the last unit we showed that dependent counter-
parts are used with a preceding consonant. In all other cases, the
independent form is used. Here is the list of the independent vowels
again. These vowels are also called ‘main’ vowels.

  A        Aa     [     [-        ]     }        e     eo    Aaoo     AaO
  a        a      i     c         u     e        e     s     o        au

When the word begins with a vowel, the independent form of the
vowel is used, as in

  Aa + ma        = Aama          mango, common
  a    +       m = am

but not the dependent form

  a + ma = ama

Similarly:

  [ + Qa          + r        =   [Qar       in this direction, here
  i   + dha       + r

but not

  i + Qa          +   r = iQar
42                                                           Script unit 3


     Also, observe in the following example:

       AaO + r = AaOr                and
       au +        r

     but not

       aO + r = aOr
     If the preceding sound is a vowel, the independent form of a vowel is
     used, e.g.:

       a     +     i   + e
       Aa + [ + e = Aa[e                   please come

     but not any of the following ways:

       a + i + e = aie
       a + i + o = ai o
       Aa + i + o = Aai o
     Now you should be able to distinguish between the following two
     words:

       k + c             ka +        c

           kI of         k[- several
     Notice that the independent form of [- c is used in k[- kac because its
     preceding sound is the vowel a A.


     Nasalized vowels
     In our transcription, vowel nasalization is indicated by a tilde ~ over
     the transliterated vowel.
        In Hindi, the two symbols which are used to mark vowel nasal-
     ization are: candrabindu (moon dot) á and bindu (dot) M. The former
     is used either over the head stroke of the vowel itself or over the
     head stroke of the consonant to which the vowel is attached. If any
     part of the vowel is written above the head stroke, then the dot is
     used rather than the moon dot. Note the following examples:

       moon dot á            dot M
Script unit 3                                                                         43


Nasalized vowel             Independent vowel           Dependent vowel (matra)

k                           Aaá                         aá
m                           [- M                        IM
o                           }á                          áU
g                           eá                          oM
q                           eoM                         OM
õ                           AaoM                        aoM
ãj                          AaOM                        aOM


Now examine the usage of the nasalized vowels in the following
words:

     h   + aá     =   haá          yes             h    + áU =    háU      am
     h   + k                                       h    + o

     Aaá + K      = AaáK           eye             ma+ aá = maaá mother
     k   + kh     = kkh                            m + k = mk

     }á + T       = }áT            camel           ma + oM = maoM in
     o   + T      = oT                             m + g = mg

     AaOM + Qaa
              = AaOOOOMQaa overturned              ma+ OM = maOM I
     ãj + dha = ãjdha                              m + q = mq


lao#ana lekhan Writing

Letter/               Stroke order              Head stroke/            Handwriting
pronunciation                                   Head bar

Aa
Aa a
[ i
[- c
] u
}e
e e
44                                                          Script unit 3


     Letter/               Stroke order      Head stroke/     Handwriting
     pronunciation                           Head bar


     eo s
     Aao o
     AaO au
     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1

     Write the following expressions in Devanagari script. Since they are
     useful, their English translation is also provided.

      1 thana vahm hs.
        The police station is right there.
      2 ap merc madad kar sakte hq?
        Can you help me?
      3 mq vahk ksse jao?
        How shall I get there?
      4 ye merc galatc nahm.
        This is not my mistake.
      5 yahk xatra hs.
        There is danger here.
      6 bacao!
        Save! (or help!)
      7 ye (written as yah) bahut zarerc hs.
        This is very urgent.
      8 Dak-khana kahk hs?
        Where is the post office?
      9 kis khiRkc par jao?
        Which window should I go to?
     10 TikaT (ticket) kitna lagega?
        How much postage will (it) need?
Script unit 3                                                      45


11 e-mail amrcka (America) bhejana cahata ho.
   (I) want to send an e-mail to America.
12 mujhe cinta/fikr hs.
   I am worried.


Exercise 2

If you have the recording, listen to the above expressions while
silently reading them.

Exercise 3

Write the following words in Devanagari script:

1 aie 2 ao    3 khaie     4 khao 5 kha lo 6 maika (Mike)


Exercise 4

Oral vs nasal vowels

1   ha exclamatory sound vs haá yes
2   hU a sound              háU am
3   hO is                   hOM are
4   mao May                 maoM in

Now transcribe the above words into Roman.
46                                                            Script unit 4




     4 caaOqaa paz – ilaip
       cautha paTh – lipi
              Script unit 4




     Conjunct letters
     In script unit 1 I mentioned that since Devanagari script is syllabic,
     every consonant symbol contains an invisible A a in it. Now let us
     learn to write consonants without this vowel. Such consonants are
     also called ‘half’ consonants.
        The simplest way to drop the A a is to use the sign \ called ‘hal’ or
     ‘halant’. For example, if you want to write the word kya, just put
     the halant sign under k and then go on to write the next syllable.
     However, Hindi speakers, particularly in handwriting, tend to prefer
     special conjunct symbols over the halant sign. The halant is more
     prevalent in word processing and the Internet. These special conjuncts
     are described in this section.
        If the consonant has a right vertical stroke a, the vertical line is
     dropped, as in:

     Consonant            Conjunct form              Word with a conjunct
                          (half consonant)

     #,a xa               #, x                       sa#,t saxt         hard
     ga ga                gg                         Aigna agni         fire
     ca ca                cc                         AcCa accha         good
     ja ja                jj                         jyaaoM jyõ         as
     Na Na                NN                         zNDa ThaNDa        cold
     t ta                 % t                        %yaaOhar tyauhar   festival
     na na                n n                        AnQaa andha        blind
     sa sa                ss                         sasta sasta        cheap


     Notice the placement of the dependent form of the vowel i i which is
     placed before the conjunct letter g g but is pronounced after the n n.
Script unit 4                                                            47


   Consonants which contain the stroke a in their middle have the
following forms:

  k ka         @k       @yaa kya      what
  f,, fa       F, f     hF,ta hafta   week

For all other letters, either the halant sign is used or the conjunct
letter sits on the top of the full consonant letter, as in:

  T\ T + T Ta         T\ + T    T + Ta       or      TR
                      pT\TI     paTTc        or      p+I bandage

  D\ D + D Da         D\ + D    D + Da       or      â
                      AD\Da     aDDa         or      Aâa station (bus)

With the emergence of new printing technology, the halant form is
gaining more prominence.


Exceptions
Once again r ra is notorious and it needs special attention. The
symbol for the conjunct r is - , as in

  k  +     - + ma     = kma-             but not   k-ma
  ka +     r     + ma = karma            fate

The conjunct r is placed at the very end of the syllable it precedes,
e.g.

  va   +   - + maa    = vamaa-           but not va-maa
  va   +   r     + ma = Varma            a last name

When r is the second member of the conjunct, it is realized as `.
Note the following clusters with r.

  P    + `        =   P`a
  p    + ra       =   pra
  %    + `        =   t`
  t    + ra       =   tra
48                                                           Script unit 4


       S    + `      =   Ea
       sh   + ra     =   shra

     With T Ta and D Da, / is added rather than -.

       T\   + /      =   T/
       T    + ra     =   Tra
       D\   + /      =   D/
       D    + ra     =   Dra


     Long consonants
     With the exception of tta, the long consonants follow the conjunct
     formation rules described above.

       %    + t      =   <a but not %t
       t    + ta     =   tta


     Nasal consonants
     In Script Unit 3 we saw that the moon dot and the simple dot can
     express vowel nasalization. However, the dot has yet another func-
     tion. When it appears over either a short vowel or a consonant, it
     shows the presence of a homorganic nasal consonant. ‘Homorganic’
     means the sound is produced by the same speech organ. The con-
     sonants listed in each of the five groups in the consonant chart
     are homorganic. For example, the five consonant sounds listed in
     the fifth column – = r, Ha ñ, Na N, na n and ma m are homorganic to the
     rest of the velar, palatal, retroflex, dental and labial consonants,
     respectively.
        When a dot is placed either over a short vowel or a consonant, it
     indicates the corresponding homorganic conjunct nasal consonant
     of the following consonant. So the dot can also be written with a
     conjunct nasal consonant, as in

       AMga =    A=\ga        arg      limb
       pMca =    pHca         pañc     juror
       zMD =     zND          ThaND    cold
       ihMdI =   ihndI        hindc    the Hindi language
       KMbaa =   Kmbaa        khamba   pole
Script unit 4                                                                 49



    Web resources
    For more details, see Syracuse University’s Hindi web page:

         http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/jishnu/101/alphabet/
           default.asp?section=0
    For more on consonant clusters:

         http://www.avashy.com/hindiscripttutor.htm
         http://acharya.iitm.ac.in/sanskrit/lessons/Devan/conj_1.html




The hide and seek game of A a

I mentioned in the chapter on the Hindi writing system and pro-
nunciation that the Devanagari script is a phonetic script and that
the words are primarily written in the way they are pronounced.
However, one should keep in mind that language is a living thing;
it keeps changing and even the most scientific script cannot keep
up with all the changes. We have already discussed the case of the
word-final silence of A a in Script Units 1 and 2. Now do some detect-
ive work and see another situation in which A a is written but not
pronounced.


Word              Written Pronounced Word             Written    Pronounced

saD,k             saRak    saRak         saD,koM      saRak+g    saRkg
road                                     road
AaOrt             aurat    aurat         AaOrtoM      aurat+g    aurtg
woman                                    women
laD,k             laRak    laRak         laD,ka       laRak+a    laRka
child (not                               boy
  used alone)
laD,k             laRak    laRak         laD,kI       laRak+c    laRkc
child (not                               girl
  used alone)
samaJa            samajh   samajh        samaJaa      samajh+a samjha
understand                               understood
50                                                              Script unit 4


     If you noticed that the penultimate (second to last) vowel a is dropped
     before a suffix, then your observation is correct. Now examine the
     following words:

     Word          Written Pronounced Word            Written      Pronounced

     saD,k         saRak    saRak       saD,kpna      saRak+pan saRakpan
     road                               roadlike
     AaOrt         aurat    aurat       AaOrtpna      aurat+pan    auratpan
     woman                              womanhood
     laD,k         laRak    laRak       laD,kpna      laRak+pan laRakpan
     child                              childhood
     samaJa        samajh   samajh      samaJadar     samajh+dar samajhdar
     understand                         intelligent


     The data presented above show that the penultimate a is dropped
     in pronunciation if the suffix begins with a vowel. Othewise it is
     retained.


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1

     Write the following expressions in Hindi. These are very useful
     expressions, so their meaning is also given.

       1 pech-tach ka daftar
         Inquiry office
       2 mq rasta bhel gayc ho.
         I (f.) am lost. (lit. I have lost my way.)
       3 mq rasta bhel gaya ho.
         I (m.) am lost. (lit. I have lost my way.)
       4 targ mat karo.
         Do not bother me.
       5 mq kuñjc DhoRh raha ho.
         I am looking for my key.
       6 nahm mil rahc.
         (I) can’t find (it).
Script unit 4                                                          51


 7 ciTTh c havac Dakse bhejiye.
   Please send (this) letter by air mail.
 8 kya ap yah saman scdhe mumbac bhej sakte hq?
   Can you send this baggage straight to Mumbai?
 9 saman ke liye rascd dcjiye.
   Please give (me) a receipt for this baggage.
10 mera saman nahm aya.
   My baggage did not arrive (by this flight).

Exercise 2
Transcribe the following sentences. Some words used in these expres-
sions are from English but they have been written in the way they
are pronounced by Hindi speakers. If you have the recording, listen
to their pronunciation. Otherwise after transcribing the sentences,
read the sentences and practise their pronunciation on your own.
 1 hma ek hF,ta idllaI maoM rhoMgao.
   We will stay in Delhi for a week.
 2 maOM yahaá Cu+I pr hUá.
   I am here on holiday.
 3 hma yahaá kama sao Aayao hOM.
   We (m.) came here on a business trip. (lit. We have come here
   with work.)
 4 yah maora pasapaoT- hO.
   This is my passport.
 5 @yaa [sa saamaana pr D\yaUTI lagaogaIÆ
   Will this baggage (or things) require duty?
 6 yao caIj,aoM maoro Apnao [stomaala ko ilae hOM.
   These things are for my own (personal) use.
 7 maoro pasa D\yaUTI vaalaa saamaana nahIM hO.
   I have nothing to declare. (lit. I do not have anything that re-
   quires duty).
 8 maoro pasa kuC igafT\sa hOM.
   I have some gifts.
 9 [samaoM isaf- kpD,o AaOr iktabaoM hOM.
   There are only clothes and books in this (bag).
10 [sa ko Alaavaa AaOr kao[- caIj,a nahIM hO.
   Besides this (I) have nothing else (to declare for duty.)
52                                                                  Script unit 4


     Exercise 3

     Note that the presence or absence of the word-medial a in the
     following words. Take a lead from the Roman transcription and
     practise the pronunciation.

     1    saD,k saRak                       saD,koM saRkg
     2    AaOrt aurat                       AaOrtoM aurtg
     3    laD,k laRak                       laD,ka laRka
     4    laD,kpna laRakpan                 laD,kI laRkc
     5    samaJa samajh                     samaJaa samjha
     6    samaJadar samajhdar               samaJaI samjhc

     Exercise 4

     Read and transliterate the the following information about the func-
     tions of a Nokia cell phone into Roman text:

          naaoikyaa faona kI duinayaa maoM Aapka svaagat hO.
          You are welcome in the Nokia world.
          ihndI maoM To@T sandoXa Baoijae
          Send a text message in Hindi.




     hTae^M kuMjaI clear key

                                                               naovaI kuMjaI navigation key




     sk`ala kuMijayaaá scroll keys




     nambar kuMijayaaá number keys
Script unit 5                                                           53




5 paácavaaá paz – ilaip
  pkcvk paTh – lipi
           Script unit 5




You must have heard the expression ‘It is not what you say that
matters but how you say it.’ In this chapter we will consider some
‘how to’ aspects of script and pronunciation together with some
other questions, such as significant and insignificant variations.


Syllables
The vowel and consonant segments can be combined into units which
are called syllables. Syllables are the smaller units which make up a
word. The syllable boundary is indicated by the symbol #, as follows:


Between successive vowels

Word                                            Syllabification

jaaAao    jao                                   jaa # Aao    ja # o
Aa[e      aie                                   Aa # [ # e   a#e#o
na[-      nac                                   na # [-      na # c
Kae       khae                                  Ka # e       kha # e



Between vowels and consonants

Word                                            Syllabification

jaata     jata                                  jaa # ta ja # ta
saaonaa   na                                    saao # naa so # na
pta       pata                                  p # ta pa # ta
54                                                             Script unit 5


     Between consonants

     Word                                                  Syllabification

     [cCa iccha                                            [c # Ca ic # cha
     saD,ko,M saRkg                                        saD, # ko,M saR # kg
     AadmaI admc                                           Aad # maI ad # mc


     Stress
     Stress means loudness, a change in volume to express a wide variety
     of meanings such as emotions, contrast, focus and change in gram-
     matical categories. This term is interchangeably used with ‘accent’
     by some linguists. It refers to the most prominent part of a syllable
     or word. As in English, stress distinguishes some nouns from verbs
     in Hindi, as in

     Noun                                           Verb

     galaa gala neck                                galaa galA cause to melt
     tlaa tala sole                                 tlaa talA cause to fry

     The stressed syllable is in italics. However, stress is usually indis-
     tinct in Hindi. So, whether one places stress on the first syllable or
     the second, the meaning will not be affected, nor will the quality of
     the pronunciation of the vowel:

        saunaa    saunaa
        suna      sunA

     This is different from English, where the vowel in the non-stressed
     syllable is reduced, such as in Alaska, where one witnesses a dif-
     ference between the pronunciation of the a in the middle position
     (i.e. stressed syllable) and in the word-initial and final position (i.e.
     unstressed syllables). This is why stress is not as distinctive and
     crucial in Hindi as in English. Therefore, Hindi is often character-
     ized as a ‘syllable-timed’ language like French, where the syllables
     are pronounced in a steady flow, resulting in a ‘machine-gun’ effect.
         The predominant pattern in Hindi is to stress the penultimate
     syllable, as in
Script unit 5                                                            55


  ikrayaa         kirAya      rent
  jaanaa          jAna        to go
  caIta           cCta        leopard
  [ndu            indu        a name
  àica            ruci        interest
  kinaka          kanika      a female name

Since short vowels are not stressed in English, chances are you will
not hear stress on the Hindi syllables with short vowels.
   The long vowel receives stress and thus takes precedence over the
penultimate syllable rule, e.g.:

  tairNaI tAriNc a female name
  isarka sirkA vinegar

Also, notice that if there is more than one long syllable, the stress
falls on the first syllable. The other intricate aspects of the stress
system in Hindi are beyond the scope of this introductory book. At
the level of word-compounding, the stress is usually placed on the
second word, as in

  baat–caIt bat-cCt conversation
  baaola–caala bol-cAl colloquial

In information-type questions, the question-word is usually
stressed.

  Aap       @yaa       kroMgaoÆ
  ap   kyA    kargge?
  you what do-will
  What will you do?

  Aap       yao      @yaaoM       kroMgaoÆ
  ap  ye   kyõ kargge?
  you this why do-will
  Why would you do this?

  Aap       khaá         jaayaMogaoÆ
  ap   kahK    jagge?
  you where go-will
  Where will you go?
56                                                           Script unit 5


     Intonation pattern
     Take for example, the word AcCa accha ‘good, ok’. It can be pro-
     nounced with different intonation in different contexts. When AcCa
     accha is uttered in the different contexts – in response to an inquiry,
     ‘What kind of person is x?’; in a statement expressing surprise, ‘Is
     that so?’; as an expression of agreement, disagreement or detach-
     ment – it will be produced with different intonation. Intonation is
     the rise and fall of the pitch of the voice. Hindi exhibits the follow-
     ing four main intonation patterns:

       rising
       falling
       rising, falling and rising
       neutral or level


     Rising intonation
     As in English, the intonation rises towards the end of the sentence in
     a yes-no type of question.

       @yaa        Aap         vahaá        jaayaoMgaoÆ
       kya    ap    vahk jagge?
       what you there go-will
       Will you go there?

     In exclamatory sentences the intonation rises sharply:

       vaao     pasa     hao       gayaaÑ
       vo pas ho gaya!
       he pass be went
       He passed (the exam!)


     Falling intonation
     Statements, prohibitives and information questions show this intona-
     tion pattern:

       laD,ka          AcCa        hO.
       laRka accha hs.
       boy    good is
       The boy is good.
Script unit 5                                                               57


   isagaroT               pInaa                 manaa   hO.
   cigreT    pcna       mana     hs.
   cigarette drinking prohibited is
   Smoking is prohibited.

   Aap        khaá                jaayaoMgaoÆ
   ap   kahk    jaygge?
   you where go-will
   Where will you go?


Rising-falling and rising intonation
In tag-questions intonation rises at the beginning of the verb and
falls at the end of the verb, and then rises slightly again while the tag
marker is pronounced.

   Aap        AayaoMgao                 naaÆ
   ap   aygge      na?
   you come-will tag
   You will come, won’t you?


Neutral or level intonation
Ordinary imperative sentences are uttered with a neutral or level
intonation.

   tuma        jaaAao
   tum         jao.
   You         go.


Linguistic variation
As mentioned in the section on the Hindi writing system and pro-
nunciation, Hindi is spoken in a vast area both inside and outside
South Asia. It is natural to expect linguistic variation in the regions.
Some regional pronunciation differences have already been pointed
out in the description of Hindi vowels and borrowed consonant
sounds. One example of variation is the pronunciation of the word-
final and medial a. In the eastern and southern varieties of Hindi,
58                                                                   Script unit 5


     the vowel a is retained in both positions. However, the a is optional
     in many words of Perso-Arabic origin, even in Standard Hindi, as
     shown here:

       kursaI       kurasc       kursc     kusaI-           chair
       sardI        saradc       sardc     sadI-            winter, cold
       garmaI       garamc       garmc     gamaI-           summer, hot
       naj,adIk     nazadck      nazdck    naj,dIk          near
       ktla         qatal        qatl      k%la             murder

     Another important source of variation is the consonant h. The
     preceding stressed vowel a becomes s if h is followed by a non-vowel
     sound. For example:

       kh         kah         but pronounced         kOh      ksh
       rhnaa      rahna       but pronounced         rOh      rshnaa
       vah        vah         but pronounced         vaao     vo
       yah        yah         but pronounced         yao      ye

     The stressed vowel is in italics. The only exceptions are the third-
     person singular pronouns which are pronounced as vaao vo and yao ye,
     respectively.
        When the preceding vowel is unstressed, the h h is dropped but
     the vowel becomes long, as in

       vajah      vajah   but pronounced         vajaa        vaja
       trh        tarah   but pronounced         tra          tara

     If the h is preceded by a and followed by u, the h is dropped and the
     merger of the two vowels either results in au (as in ‘caught’) or o.
     For example, bahut is pronounced either as baut or bot.
         In many dialects, the h follows the script pronunciation (i.e. is
     pronounced the way it is written).


     Verb forms: more than one spelling
     Some verb forms ending in aa and e can be written with more than
     one spelling. For example, the subjunctive, past and imperative forms
     of the verb can be written using the following variations:
Script unit 5                                                                      59


Verb                    Past         Subjunctive      Imperative

jaa ja to go            gae gaye     jaae jae         jaaAao jao jaa[e jaiye
                        gayao gaye   jaayao jaye      jaavaao javo jaa[yao jaiye
                                     jaaya jay


Phonetic considerations are primarily responsible for variations in
traditional spellings.


AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1

Mark the syllable boundary in the following words using the
symbol #.

1   Aa[yao aiye
2   AaOrtoM aurtg
3   pZ,ta paRhta
4   saunaao suno
5   namasto namaste
6   imalaoMgao milgge
7   saunakr sunkar
8   AadmaI admc

Exercise 2

Read through the following question and answers, and try to imagine
the intonation patterns involved. It would be helpful to seek the
assistance of a native speaker.

1 Yes–no type
  Q:   @yaa vaao pasa hao gayaaÆ
       kya vo pAs ho gaya?           Did he pass (the exam)?
  Ans: haá
       hk
60                                                                  Script unit 5


     2 Information question
       Q:    kaOna saa gao`D imalaaÆ
             kaun sa grade mila?              What grade did he get?
       Ans: A ga`oD .
             ‘A’ grade
     3 Statement
       vaao AcCa laD,ka hO.
       vo accha laRka hs.
       He is a good boy.
     4 Surprise
       Statement:      vaao pasa hao gayaa.
                       vo pas ho gaya. He passed the exam.
       reply:          AcCaÑ
                       accha!                  (with surprised intonation)
                                               implying ‘Is that so? I do not
                                               believe you.’
     5 Agreement
                        AaAaoÊ iflma doKnao calaMo.
       Suggestion: ao, film dekhne calg.              Come on, let’s go and see
                                                        a film.
       Agreement:       AcCa.
                        accha.                        Okay.
     6 Detached
       Suggestion:      AaAaoÊ iflma doKnao calaoM.
                        ao, film dekhne calg.         Come on, let’s go and see
                                                        a film.
       Agreement:       AcCa.
                        accha.                        Okay.
     7 Normal commands
       drvaajaa baMd krao.
       darvaza band karo. Close the door.

     Exercise 3

     Read the following weather forecast for India and transcribe the
     Hindi words into Roman. For numerals, consult the English–Hindi
     vocabulary section. Assume that the word-final a is dropped.
Script unit 5                                                                      61



 maaOsama weather   idllaI Delhi         maumba[- Mumbai      kaolakta Kolkata

 tapmaana           10 iDga`I saI 10°C   15 iDga`I saI 15°C   16 iDga`I saI 16°C
    temperature


 barsaat rain,      baairSa rain         baadla cloud         QaUp sunny
    precipitation


 hvaa wind          toja, strong         hlkI light           mand light
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette   63




paz
paTh
Units
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                       65




1 namasto/namaskar.
  namaste/
  namaskar
       Greetings and social etiquette




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   use simple greetings
  •   learn expressions of social etiquette
  •   use expressions for leave-taking
  •   ask simple questions
  •   make simple requests
  •   use personal pronouns (e.g., ‘I’, ‘we’, ‘you’, etc.)
  •   use some nouns and adjectives
66                             Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                    (CD 1; 9)

     namast o namaste greetings
     Hindu–Sikh greetings and other social etiquette

     Hindi greetings vary according to the religion of the speaker, but
     not according to the time of the day. In some cases, the speaker may
     choose to greet according to the religion of his/her listener. Such a
     choice is socially more appealing to the listener and you can easily
     win the hearts of your listeners by being sensitive to their way of
     greeting.

     Mohan goes to see Sarita in her office. They know each other but are
     not close friends.

     maaohna:   namasto jaI.
     Mohan: namaste jc.
     sairta:   namasto.@yaa hala hOÆ
     Sarita: namaste. kya hal hs?
     maaohna:  zIk hO AaOr AapÆ
     Mohan: Thck hs, aur ap?
     sairta:   maOM BaI zIk háU.hukma kIijayao.
     Sarita: mq bhc Thck ho. hukam kcjie.
     maaohna:  hukma nahIMÊ ivanatI hO.
     Mohan: hukam nahm, vintc hs.
     (The conversation continues for some time.)
     maaohna:  AcCaÊ namasto.
     Mohan: accha, namaste.
     sairta:   namasto.
     Sarita: namaste.

     Mohan: Greetings.
     Sarita: Greetings. How are you?
     Mohan: Fine. And you?
     Sarita: I am fine too. What can I do for you? [lit. do order]
     Mohan: (It is) not an order, (but) a request.
     (The conversation continues for some time.)
     Mohan: Okay. Goodbye.
     Sarita: Goodbye.
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                      67


SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary                   (CD 1; 10)


(Note: It is standard convention to transliterate Hindi words in lower
case and this convention is used here. Therefore, the first letter of the
first word is not capitalized. The only exceptions are upper case T, D,
N and R which represent the retroflex sounds.)


   namasto   namaste    Hindu greeting and reply to the greeting;
                           may be used by other religions too
   jaI       jc         honorific word (optional with greetings)
   @yaa      kya        what
   hala      hal (m.)   condition
   hO        hs         is
   zIk       Th ck      fine; okay
   AaOr      aur        and
   Aap       ap         you (honorific)
   maOM      mq         I
   BaI       bh c       also
   hU\á      ho         am
   hukma     hukam (m.) order
   kIijae    kcjie      please do
   nahIM     nahm       not
   ivanatI   vintc (f.) request



Pronunciation

In the eastern Hindi-speaking area (e.g. in the city of Banaras), the
vowel s in the words, maOM mq and hO hs, is pronounced as a diphthong,
a combination of two vowels, i.e. [ai = a + i]. However, in the western
Hindi-speaking area (e.g. in Delhi), it is pronounced as a vowel s,
as in English words such as cat. Since this vowel pronunciation is
considered to be the standard, this is given in the recordings. The
word given in angular brackets < > shows that its pronunciation
differs from that suggested by the script. This is shown only when
the word is introduced for the first time.
   The verb form kIijae [kcjie] can also be pronounced as [kcjiye].
The semivowel [y] can intervene between the last two vowels. This
word can be written with the semivowel too: kIijayao kcjiye.
68                                Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     Notes
     Hindu–Sikh greetings and their regional variants
     namasto namaste (lit. ‘I bow in your respect’.) is the most common greeting
     used by Hindus and even by non-Hindus. It is expressed with the
     hands folded in front of the chest. It may be optionally followed
     by jaI jc to show respect and politeness. A more formal alternative
     to namasto namaste is namaskar namaskar. In the rural areas many other
     variants such as rama-rama ram-ram and jaya js ram jc kc (pronounced jaO)
     rama jaI kI are found. Sikhs prefer sat sa`I Akala sat src akal instead
     of namasto namaste. The gesture of folding hands, however, remains
     the same. Hindi greetings do not vary at different times of day.
         namaste namasto (or sat src akal sat sa`I Akala by Sikhs) and its variants
     are used for both ‘hello’ and ‘goodbye’.

     Word-for-word translation
     Where a Hindi expression differs literally from its English transla-
     tional equivalent, we show this difference in the notes by giving a
     word-for-word translation. Observe the word-for-word translation
     of the Hindi equivalent of the English ‘How are you?’:

        @yaa       hala            hOÆ
        kya        hal             hs?
        what       condition       is?

     and its reply
        zIk       hO.
        Th ck     hs
        fine      is

     Honorific pronoun
     The honorific pronoun Aap ap ‘you’ is grammatically plural, even if
     it refers to one person. Grammatically, it is the same as the English
     ‘you’. For example, in Standard English one will never say ‘you is’.

     The politeness bug
     Politeness can be quite infectious. If the speaker is being very polite
     in his/her speech, the listener is obligated either to match or out-
     perform the speaker. The expression
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                       69


   hukma     kIijae.
   hukam kcjie.
   order please do
   Please (give me) an order. = What can I do for you?

is a very formal and cultured way of asking ‘What can I do for you?’
The listener appropriately uses an equally polite expression:

   hukma     nahIM    ivanatI      hO.
   hukam nahm vintc          hs
   order not request is
   It is not an order (but) a request.

Word order
Note the difference between the word order of Hindi and that of
English. In Hindi, the verb (e.g. ‘is’, ‘am’, ‘are’, etc.) usually appears
at the end of the sentence. The object (e.g. ‘order’) appears before
the verb.


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                        (CD 1; 12)

salaama salAm salam
Muslim greetings and social etiquette
Muslims tend to use more Persian and Arabic words and phrases.
They may refer to their language as ‘Urdu’ or ‘Hindustani’. How-
ever, Hindi, Urdu and Hindustani are mutually intelligible (for
details see the Introduction).
   Tahsin Siddiqui and Razia Arif run into each other in a car park
(parking lot).

thsaIna:   salaamaÊ rijayaa jaI.
Tahsin: salam, razia jc.
rijayaa: salaamaÊ saba K,Oiryat hOÆ
Razia: salam. sab xsriyat hs?
thsaIna: maohrbaanaI hOÊ AaOr Aapko imaja,aja kOsao hOMÆ
Tahsin: meharbanc hs, aur apke mizaj ksse hq?
rijayaa: Allaah ka Sauk` hO.
Razia: allah ka shukra hs.
(The conversation continues for some time.)
70                                  Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     thsaIna:     AcCaÊ Kuda haif,ja,.
     Tahsin: accha, xuda hafiz.
     rijayaa: Kuda haif,ja,.
     Razia: xuda hafiz.
     Tahsin: Greetings Razia.
     Razia: Greetings. How are you?
     Tahsin: Fine. And, how are you?
     (The conversation continues for some time.)
     Razia: I am fine.
     Tahsin: Okay. Goodbye.
     Razia: Goodbye.

     SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
     salaama            salam              Muslim greeting and reply to
                                              the greeting
     saba               sab                all
     K,Oiryat           xsriyat (f.)       safety, welfare
     maohrbaanaI        meharbanc (f.)     kindness
     Aapko              apke               your
     imaja,aja          mizaj (m.)         temperament, nature
     kOsao              ksse               how
     hOM                hq                 are
     Allaah ka Sauk`    allah ka shukra    fine
     Kuda haif,ja,      xuda hafiz         goodbye


     Pronunciation
     K,Oiryat xsriyat and Kuda xuda are often pronounced as khsriyat and
     khuda by non-Muslims, respectively. In short, x may be pronounced
     as [kh ]. (See Script Unit 1.)
        imaj,aaja mizaj and haif,ja, hafiz are often pronounced as [mijaj]
     and [haphij] respectively by non-Muslims. In other words, z may be
     pronounced as [j].


     Notes
     Muslim greeting and leave taking
     salaama salam (an abbreviated form of salam alskum) is used for ‘hello’
     by Muslims instead of namasto namaste. It is expressed by raising the
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                    71


right hand to the forehead. The word for ‘goodbye’ is Kuda haif,ja,
xuda hafiz.

Other ways of saying ‘How are you?’
Another way of saying ‘How are you?’ is ‘Is everything fine?’ or
‘Is all well (with you)?’ The expression for this is

  saba     K,Oiryat         hOÆ
  sab xsriyat hs?
  all welfare is
  How are you? (lit. ‘Is everything fine [with you]?’)

which is followed by an answer:

  maohrbaanaI         hO.
  meharbanc hs
  kindness      is
  (It is your) kindness, i.e. because of your kindness, everything is
  fine with me.

Yet another interchangeable way of asking ‘How are you?’ is some-
thing like ‘How are your habits?’, as in the following sentence:

  Aapko         imaj,aaja     kOsao     hOMÆ
  apke   mizaj                ksse hq?
  you-of habits               how are

This question is followed by the answer ‘With God’s grace, every-
thing is fine.’ The Hindi expression for this is:

  Allaah ka Sauk                      hO.
  allah         ka shukra             hs
  God           of thank              is

The above exchange is considered super-polite. Such an exchange
is usually used more often by Muslims. Nevertheless, Hindus and
others may also use it, depending upon their regional (e.g. in the city
of Lucknow) and social background (e.g. inter-ethnic dealings).

What to do when speakers of different religions meet
When speakers of different religions greet each other, it is considered
polite for the person who speaks first to greet the listener according
72                                 Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     to his or her religion. Respecting the religious feelings of others
     is the rule of politeness. Nowadays the English word ‘hello’ can be
     used to stress neutrality and modernity at the same time. However,
     the English word ‘hello’ is usually followed by the respectful and
     polite denoting word jaI jc.


     vyaakrNa vyakaraNa Grammar
     Word order in Hindi
     The order of words in a Hindi sentence is not as rigidly fixed as it is
     thought to be by prescriptive and traditional grammarians. Although
     a Hindi sentence usually (but not invariably) begins with a subject
     and ends with a verb, if the sentence has an object, this is sand-
     wiched between the subject and the verb. That is why Hindi is often
     called an SOV language (i.e. subject/object/verb language). However,
     Hindi speakers or writers enjoy considerable freedom in placing words
     to achieve stylistic effects. In dialogue 1 Sarita asks:

       @yaa    hala          hOÆ
       kya  hal       hs?
       what condition is
       How are you?

     Usually the question word @yaa kya ‘what’ does not appear in the sent-
     ence initial position. The ordinary form of the sentence is as follows:

       hala           @yaa   hOÆ
       hal       kya  hs?
       condition what is
       How are you?

     The question word @yaa kya ‘what’ is placed at the beginning of the
     sentence to give special emphasis to it. Also, you may have noticed
     the deletion of the implied element (i.e. the possessive pronoun ‘your’
     modifying the subject noun ‘condition’) in the conversation. Such
     deletions also affect Hindi word order. For example, in the same
     dialogue, Mohan responds to Sarita’s question in the following way:

       zIk    hO.
       Thck hs
       fine is
       I am fine.
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                        73


Mohan’s reply has no subject because the subject phrase is implied.
The full version of the sentence is as follows:

   maora     hala            zIk   hO.
   mera hal            Thck hs
   my     condition fine is
   I am fine. (lit. ‘My condition is fine.’)

The implied subject (i.e. maora hala mera hal) is rarely spelled out in the
reply.


Yes–no questions
Yes–no questions involve either an affirmative or a negative answer.
In spoken Hindi, yes–no questions are much simpler than in English.
They are usually formed by changing intonation, i.e. with a rising
tone of voice at the end of the sentence. You do not need to place
any form of the verb before the subject, as you do in English. In
dialogue 2 above, Razia asks
   saba    K,Oiryat    hOÆ
   sab xsriyat hs?
   all welfare is
   Is all well? or Is everything fine?

simply by ‘yes–no question intonation’, i.e. by raising the pitch of
voice at the end of the sentence. The same sentence with a ‘state-
ment intonation’ (pitch falling at the end), as in English, would
mean ‘All is well’ = ‘I am fine.’


Personal and demonstrative pronoun
The Hindi personal pronouns are

   mq           maOM     I
   te           tU       you (singular)
   <vo>         vah      she, he, it; that
   <ye>         yah      this
   ham          hma      we
   tum          tuma     you (plural)
   ap           Aap      you (honorific)
   ve           vao      they; those
   ye           yao      these
74                              Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     There is no gender distinction in Hindi pronouns.
          tU te is considered to be either too intimate or too rude. We advise
     you not to use tU te unless you are absolutely sure about your
     intimate relationship with the listener and your listener has already
     been using this pronoun in his/her exchanges with you. In short, you
     will not get much of a chance to hear and use tU te. In the case of
     an emerging familiar relationship the only pronoun you will need is
     tuma tum.
          tuma tum can be used with one or more than one addressee.
     However, like the English ‘you’, it never takes a singular verb
     form.
          Aap ap is used to show respect and politeness. You will use this
     pronoun most often in your exchange with friends and strangers.
     Indian society is changing quickly and you should avoid stereo-
     typing. You may have heard about the distinction between lower
     and higher caste Indians. Our advice is use Aap ap for everybody
     regardless of his/her caste and status. This approach is the safest
     form of address in the final analysis. Aap ap always takes a plural
     verb (e.g. the Hindi equivalent of ‘you are’ and not ‘you is’) regard-
     less of the number of addressees.
          <vo> is written as vah vah, but is pronounced as vaao vo most
     widely. vaao vo ‘that’ and vao ve ‘those’ (called ‘remote demonstrative’
     pronouns) are also used to refer to person(s) or object(s) far from
     the speaker.
          <ye> ‘this, these’ (called ‘proximate demonstrative’ pronouns) can
     be used to refer to both singular and plural person(s) or object(s)
     close to the speaker. The only difference is the singular form <ye>,
     which is written differently. It is written as yah yah.


     Number and gender (plural formation of
     unmarked nouns)
     Hindi nouns (like nouns in Spanish, Italian and French) are marked
     for both number and gender. There are two numbers (singular and
     plural) and two genders (masculine and feminine). Adjectives and
     verbs agree with nouns in number and gender.
        The following box will provide you with Magic Key 1 to open
     a treasure chest of different noun and verb forms. Just let your
     imagination capture the suffixes boxed, and then you can begin to
     make new forms of nouns, adjectives and verbs. The only limit is
     your imagination!
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                          75


Magic Key 1

                       Singular    Plural
   Masculine           -a          -e
   Feminine            -c          -ik (nouns)
                                   -c   (adjectives; verbs)


Here are some examples of nouns and adjectives. Examples of verbs
will be given in the next unit. You will find slight changes in the
feminine plural forms of verbs and these are discussed in Unit 5.

Masculine
Singular                                        Plural

beTa    baoTa son                               beTe     baoTo    sons
bacca   baccaa child                            bacce    baccao   children
bura    baura bad                               bure     bauro    bad

Feminine
Singular                                        Plural

beTc    baoTI daughter                          beTik    baooiTyaaá daughters
baccc   baccaI child                            baccik   baiccayaaá children
burc    baurI bad                               burc     baurI      bad

Masculine nouns ending in a and feminine nouns ending in c are
called unmarked nouns in Hindi grammars. Similarly, the adjectives
that end in a are called unmarked (or majority) adjectives.
   Nouns have gender too. In fact, most of the boxed suffixes draw
their cues from the gender and number markings of nouns. How-
ever, there are no absolutes, as is the case in the real world. The
logical gender holds only in the case of animate nouns. Male human
beings receive masculine gender, whereas females receive feminine
gender. However, inanimate and abstract nouns can either be mas-
culine or feminine. saonaa sena ‘army’, which (in India) does not admit
women, is feminine; in addition, daZ,I daRh c ‘beard’ is also feminine.
Some animate nouns (species of animals, birds, insects, etc.) are
either masculine or feminine. For example, macCr macchar ‘mosquito’,
#aTmala khaTmal ‘bug’, caIta ccta ‘leopard’ and ]llaU ulle ‘owl’, are mas-
culine in gender, and nouns such as icaD,I ciRc ‘bird’, ma@KI makkh c ‘fly’
and macCI macchc ‘fish’ are feminine. However, do not worry about the
76                                    Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     absolute gender in the case of inanimate and abstract nouns. There
     follow some rules of thumb for you to navigate the unpredictable
     waters of gender.
        Look at the following representative list of Hindi words and see if
     you can guess the gender rules.

     Masculine                                          Feminine

     laRka     laD,ka      boy                          laRkc    laD,kI      girl
     ghoRa     GaaoD,a     horse                        ghoRc    GaaoD,I     mare
     kamra     kmara       room                         kursc    kursaI      chair
     darvaza   drvaaja,a   door                         khiRkc   iKD,kI      window
     landan    landna      London                       dillc    idllaI      Delhi
     ghar      Gar         house                        kitab    ik,,,taba   book
     hath      haqa        hand                         nazar    naja,r      vision
     namak     namak       salt                         mirc     imaca-      pepper
     admc      AadmaI      man                          aurat    AaOrt       woman
     chata     Cata        umbrella                     mata     maata       mother


     Most Hindi nouns ending in a are masculine and those ending in c
     are feminine. There are exceptions though: AadmaI admc ‘man’ ends in
     c and is masculine and maata mata ‘mother’ ends in a and is feminine.
     But you have probably guessed that the logical gender takes preced-
     ence over the word-final sound. After all, how could the word for
     ‘mother’ be other than feminine in gender and the word ‘man’ be
     other than masculine? These two criteria – logical gender and word-
     final sound – can solve the mystery of Hindi gender in nearly every
     case.


     Agreement: adjectives and possessive
     adjectives
     You have already come across one very productive adjective: AcCa
     accha ‘good/fine’ which ends in a. It is a majority adjective. By sub-
     stituting the suffixes given in the box, we can produce other forms.
     For example:

       accha       laRka        AcCa laD,ka   acche   laRke         AcCo laD,ko
       good        boy                        good    boys
       acchc       laRkc        AcCI laD,kI   acchc   laRkiyk       AcCI laD,ikyaaá
       good        girl                       good    girls
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                                                 77


The question word kOsaa kssa ‘how’ also behaves like an adjective
ending in a.

   kssa laRka kOsaa laD,ka        ksse laRke    kOsao laD,ko
   what kind of boy               what kind of boys
   kssc laRkc kOsaI laD,kI        kssc laRkiyk kOsaI laD,ikyaaá
   what kind of girl              what kind of girls

The Hindi equivalents of the English possessive pronouns (‘my’,
‘our’, etc.) are:

   mera        maora        my
   hamara      hmaara       our
   tera        tora         your (singular, most intimate/non-honorific)
   tumhara     tumhara      your (plural, familiar)
   apka        Aapka        your (plural, honorific)
   uska        ]saka        his/her (remote)
   unka        ]naka        their (remote)
   iska        [saka        his/her (proximate)
   inka        [naka        their (proximate)

Hindi possessive pronouns listed above follow the pattern of adject-
ives which end in a.

   mera      laRka          maora laD,ka     mere     laRke         maooro laD,ko
   my        boy                             my       boys
   merc      laRkc          maorI laD,kI     merc     laRkiyk       maorI laD,ikyaaá
   my        girl                            my       girls

From the above examples, it is clear that adjectives ending in a agree
with the nouns that follow them. Therefore, they behave like ‘major-
ity’ adjectives.
   In English, it is the gender of the possessor in third person singular
pronouns (i.e. ‘his girl’, ‘her girl’) that is marked on possessive adject-
ives. Such a distinction is not made in Hindi. Notice, however, that
because possessive adjectives agree with the nouns that follow them,
the form of a possessive adjective can change in accordance with the
gender and the number of the possessed noun. Thus, the following
phrases are ambiguous in Hindi:

   uska      laRka       ]saka laD,ka uske         laRke     ]sako laD,ko
   his/her   boy                           his/her boys
   uskc      laRkc       ]sakI laD,kI      uskc    laRkcyk   ]sakI laD,ikyaaá
   his/her   girl                          his/her girls
78                                       Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     ]saka laD,ka uska laRka means both ‘his boy’ and ‘her boy’. Since laD,ka
     laRka ‘boy’ is masculine, the possessive adjective ]saka uska ‘his/her’
     takes the masculine form, regardless of whether the boy in question
     belongs to a man or a woman. Similarly, ]sakI laD,kI uskc laRkc can
     mean both ‘his girl’ or ‘her girl’. It is the feminine gender of the
     word laD,kI laRkc ‘girl’ that assigns gender to the possessive pronoun.


     AByaasa abhyas Exercises
     Exercise 1
     How would you reply to someone who said this to you?

     1   namaste.                     namasto.
     2   kya haal hs?                 @yaa hala hOÆ
     3   salam.                       salaama.
     4   mizaj ksse hq?               imaja,aja kOsao hMOÆ
     5   accha, namaste.              AcCa, namasto.
     6   sat src akal jc.             sat\ sa`I Akala jaI.
     7   sab xsriyat hs?              saba K,Oiryat hOÆ
     8   namaste jc.                  namasto jaI.
     9   hukam kcjie.                 hukma kIijayao.

     Exercise 2

     Match the replies in column B with the greetings or questions in
     column A.

         A                                 B
     1   namasto.                          zIk hO.
         namaste                           Thck hs
     2   @yaa hala hOÆ                     Allaah ka Sauk` hO.
         kya hal hs?                       allah ka shukra hs.
     3   Aapko imaja,aja kOsao hMOÆ        namasto.
         ap ke mizaj ksse hq               namaste.
     4   Kuda haif,ja,                     Kuda haif,ja,.
         xuda hafiz.                       xuda hafiz.
     5   saba KO,iryat hOÆ                 salaama.
         sab xsriyat hs?                   salam.
     6   salaama                           maohrbaanaI hO.
         salam.                            meharbanc hs.
Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette                   79


Exercise 3
Fill in the gaps in the two conversations given below:

Conversation 1
A:    salaama.
      salam.
B:    __________.
B:    saba KO,iryat hOÆ
      sab xsriyat hs?
A:    _________hO AaOr Aap ko ____________ kOsao hOMÆ
      _________hs, aur ap ke_________ ksse hq?
B:    Allaah ka___________ ________.
      allah ka__________ _________ .

Conversation 2
A:    ________________.
B:    sat sa`I Akala jaI.
      sat src akal jc.
B:    @yaa________ hOÆ
      kya________ hs?
A:    ___________ hO AaOr __________Æ
      ____________ hs, aur_______?
B:    maOM BaI ___________ ____________.
      mq bhc_________ ____________.
A:    AcCa ______ _______ _______.
      accha,______ ______ _______
B:    sat sa`I Akala.
      sat src akal.

Exercise 4
Answer the following questions:

1
     Question:     @yaa hala hOÆ
                   kya hal hs?
     Answer:
     Question:     AaOr AapÆ
                   aur ap?
     Answer:
80                                            Unit 1: Greetings and social etiquette


     2
         Question:           Aap kOsao hMOÆ
                             ap ksse hq?
         Answer:

     Exercise 5

     Give short sentences corresponding to the long sentences in the left-
     hand column.

         Long sentences                         Short sentences
     1   AaOr Aap kOsao hOMÆ                    ___________________
         aur ap ksse hq                         ___________________
     2   maMO BaI zIk hUá.                      ___________________
         mq bhi Thck ho                         ___________________
     3   AapkI maohrbaanaI hO.                  ___________________
         apkc meharbanc hs.                     ___________________
     4   Aapko imaja,aja kOsao hMOÆ             ___________________
         apke mizaj ksse hq?


     Exercise 6                    (CD 1; 15)

     If you have the recording, listen to the dialogue and identify the
     religion of the speakers on the basis of their use of greetings and
     goodbyes.

         A: Male voice                        B: Female voice

     SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
     iktaba       kitab (f.)          book
     ko ilayao    ke liye             for
     kao[-        koc                 some
     baat         bat (f.)            matter
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                        81




2 Aap khaá ko/kI hOMÆ
       Where are you from?




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   introduce yourself and others
  •   say and ask what you and others do
  •   say and ask where you and others work
  •   learn self-disclosure techniques about you and your family
  •   ask someone’s address
  •   refer to inseparable possessions
  •   use very frequent adjectives
  •   learn plural formation
  •   form the simple present tense
82                                                    Unit 2: Where are you from?


     AMga`oja,I manaa hOÆ
     English prohibition?
     Hindi speakers are not snobbish in their linguistic attitude. They
     treat English as one of their languages. Therefore, many English
     words have been nativized into Hindi and they have their own Hindi
     pronunciation. The realization that English words are not alien to
     Hindi speakers will give you a thrill like running into a long-lost
     friend. Moreover, there are a number of modern contexts – such as
     jobs and titles – which cannot be adequately translated into Hindi
     because of their social meaning. Wait a minute! Do not be quick to
     value-judge Hindi or Indians. The lack of a word does not mean
     that the language is not rich enough. It simply means that Hindi
     responds to new contexts and needs by borrowing from English and
     other languages rather than inventing new words. In this way, Hindi
     is like English.
         In the following dialogues, no attempt is made to artificially trans-
     late an English word/expression artificially into Hindi, if the English
     word has become a natural part of the Hindi language. The original
     English words in the text are italicized. Their native pronunciation
     is also given.


     baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                                (CD 1; 17)

     Small-talk
     A young stock broker, Mukesh Bhargava, wants to meet a distinguished
     looking gentleman standing alone in a corner gazing at the wall. On
     learning from a friend that his name is Dr Anup Patel, Mr Bhargava
     approaches him. Having exchanged greetings, Mukesh Bhargava under-
     takes the task of introducing himself.

     maukoSa:       kiheÊ Aapka naama Da^@Tr AnaUp pTola hO naÆ
     Mukesh:        kahiye, apka nam DakTar Anep Patel hs na?
     AnaUp:         jaI haáÊ maora naama AnaUp pTola hO.
     Anup:          jc hk, mera nam Anep Patel hs.
                    (extending his hand to shake hands)
     maukoSa:       maora naama maukoSa hO.
     Mukesh:        mera nam mukesh hs.
     AnaUp:         imala ko baD,I KuSaI hu[-.Aap ka pUra naama @yaa hOÆ
     Anup:          mil ke baRc xushc huc. ap ka pera nam kya hs?
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                                  83


maukoSa:          maukoSa Baaga-va hO.
Mukesh: mukesh bhargav hs.
AnaUp:   Aap @yaa krto hMOÆ
Anup:    ap kya karte hq?
maukoSa: maOM sTak ba`aokr hUá.Aap maODIkla Da@Tr hOMÆ
Mukesh: mq sTak brokar [stockbroker] ho. ap msDikal DakTar
         [medical doctor] hq?
AnaUp:   jaI nahIMÊ maOM maODIkla Da^@Tr nahIM háU.dUsara Da@Tr hUá.
Anup?:   jc nahm, mq msDikal DakTar nahm ho. desra DakTar ho.

Mukesh:           Excuse me, you are Dr Anup Patel, aren’t you?
Anup:             Yes, my name is Anup Patel.
Mukesh:           My name is Mukesh.
Anup:             Pleased to meet (you). What is your full name?
Mukesh:           My name is Mukesh Bhargava.
Anup:             What (work) do you do?
Mukesh:           I am a stockbroker. Are you a medical doctor?
Anup:             No, I am not a medical doctor. (I) am the other (kind
                  of) doctor. (i.e. I am a PhD)

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
khnaa                          kahna (+ne)             to say
kihe /kihyao                   kahiye                  Excuse me!
naama                          nam (m.)                name
naa                            na                      isn’t it?
haá                            h                       yes
imala ko baD,I K,uSaI h[-      mil ke baRc xushc huc   pleased to meet you
PaURra                         pera (m. adj.)          full
krnaa                          karna (+ne)             to do
dUsara                         desra (m. adj.)         second, other


Notes
Attention getters
The Hindi literal equivalent of the English expression ‘Excuse
me!’ is maf kcjiye. However, the Hindi expression actually means
‘I apologize’ or ‘I beg your pardon’. Therefore, it is not suited
to those contexts observed in the above dialogue where the real
aim of ‘Excuse me’ is to get attention. Although some educated
84                                                  Unit 2: Where are you from?


     English-speaking Indians tend to translate directly from English,
     this is not the natural tendency of native speakers. The expression
     ‘Excuse me’ is best paraphrased by the native Hindi speaker either
     as ‘please say’ kihe kahiye or ‘please listen’ sauinae suniye. In fact, this
     is true of many languages, for example Spanish.

     Do not use mAf kCjiye if you do not intend to apologize. Such an
     inappropriate choice could make a learner the easy target of
     unwanted jokes.

     Social linguistic rituals
     Every language employs some expressions which are often fixed and
     invariable. For instance, in greeting someone, one might use the
     expression ‘Hi there’; but if one examines this expression, it is rather
     a strange one as there is no subject, no verb and no chance of
     changing the expression even slightly, for example to ‘Hi here’. In
     some respects, Hindi expressions such as ‘Pleased to see you’ belong
     to this category. For the time being, you should memorize them
     without going further into their composition. Also, learn their appro-
     priate usage. They are used usually in introductions. However, if a
     waiter is introducing himself, you do not need to use this expression
     in response.
        The mystery of what the correct subject of ‘Pleased to see you’ is
     will become clear later when the concept of ko subjects (called
     ‘dative subjects’ or ‘experiential subjects’) is introduced. For the time
     being, use the expression as if it were a subject-less sentence.

     Word-for-word translation
     The Hindi expression of ‘I am pleased to meet you’ is

        imala ko          baD,I     KuSaI                hu[-.
        mil ke            baRc      xushc                huc
        met-having        big       happiness            happened

     In the above expression, the object ‘you’ is implied. However, for
     emphasis, the object can be inserted into the above expression:

        Aapsao         imala ko             baD,I       K,uSaI       hu[-.
        ap se          mil ke               baRc        xushc       huc
        you-with       met-having           big         happiness   happened
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                              85


Notice the Hindi equivalent of the English ‘I am pleased to meet
you’ is ‘Having met you, I am pleased.’


Word order of the question word ‘what’

Observe the place of the question word @yaa kya ‘what’ in the follow-
ing sentences:

  Aapka pUra      naama    @yaa     hOÆ
  ap ka pera nam       kya hs?
  your full name what is
  What is your full name?

  Aap    @yaa   kama      krto    hOMÆ
  ap   kya   kam karte hq?
  you what work do         are
  What do you do? = What is your job?

When one compares these sentences with the socially ritualistic
expression @yaa hala hO kya hal hs, one might be tempted to conclude
that ‘anything goes’ regarding the placement of @yaa kya in a sen-
tence. These examples strengthen this belief further because one can
say the above two sentences in the following way:

  Aapka @yaa      pUra    naama    hOÆ
  apka kya      pera nam  hs?
  your what full name is
  What is your full name?

  Aap    kama   @yaa      krto    hOMÆ
  ap   kam kya      karte hq?
  you work what do         are
  What do you do? = What is your job?

The placement of @yaa kya at the beginning or at the end of the
sentence, or between the two verbal elements, causes some prob-
lems. It changes the meaning of the sentences and may even sound
abrupt and impolite. Therefore, the rule of thumb is to keep the
question word closer to the word that is the subject of the inquiry.
@yaa kya is usually placed before the noun or the verb it modifies. If
the noun phrase is modified, as the noun naama nam is modified in the
86                                                      Unit 2: Where are you from?


     following sentence by two modifiers (‘your’ and ‘full’), rather than
     breaking the bond between the noun and the modifier as in

        Aapka      @yaa          pUra           naama     hOÆ
        apka       kya           pera           nam       hs?

     the question word is placed after the noun.

        Aapka      pUra           naama         @yaa      hOÆ
        apka       pera           nam           kya       hs?

     In the following sentence, the noun kama kam is, however, not modi-
     fied further; thus, it is better to say

        Aap      @yaa        kama           krto         hOMÆ
        ap       kya         kam            karte        hq?

     i.e. lit. ‘What work do you do?’ instead of the following sentence,
     which has some negative connotations as in the English sentence
     ‘Tell me, what do you do anyway?’

        Aap      kama         @yaa          krto         hOMÆ
        ap       kam          kya           karte        hq?


     baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                 (CD 1; 19)

     Where are you from?
     Indian train travel can be nostalgic. Two female college students
     on their way to Banaras from Delhi engage in a dialogue which is
     typical of Indian travellers whether from urban or rural areas. After
     asking each other their names, Kanika Bhatia and Sunita Divan start
     inquiring about each other’s family background.

     kinaka:     Aap khaá kI hOMÆ
     Kanika:     ap kahk kc hq?
     saunaIta:   maOM idllaI kI hUá AaOr AapÆ
     Sunita:     mq dillc kc ho. aur ap?
     kinaka:     maOM banaarsa maoM rhtI hUá.
     Kanika:     mq banaras mg rshtc ho.
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                                   87


saunaIta:     Aapko iktnao Baa[- bahnaoM hOMÆ
Sunita:       apke kitne bhac-bshsng hq?
kinaka:       hma caar Baa[- AaOr dao bahnaoM hOM.
Kanika:       ham car bhac aur do bshsng hq.
saunaIta:     maora ek Baa[- AaOr ek bahna hO.
Sunita:       mera ek bhac aur ek bshsn hs.

Kanika:       Where are you from?
Sunita:       I am from Delhi. And you?
Kanika:       I live in Banaras.
Sunita:       How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Kanika:       We are four brothers and two sisters.
Sunita:       I have one brother and a sister.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
khaá        kahk                where
maoM        mg                  in
idllaI      dillc (f.)          Delhi (the capital city)
kI          kc (f.)             of
banaarsa    banaras             Banaras (one of the oldest cities of India)
rhnaa       <rshna>             live
iktnaa      kitna (m.)          how many?
iktnao      kitne               how many?
Baa[-       bhac (m.)           brother/brothers
bahna       <bshsn> (f.)        sister
caar        car                 four
dao         do                  two
ek          ek                  one



Pronunciation
The word for sister is written as bahna bahan but is pronounced as
bshsn. You must have noticed by now that the sound h in the mid-
dle of a word (when sandwiched between the vowels a and the final
position) alters the pronunciation of the preceding vowel. Go back
to Unit 1 and check the pronunciation of third person singular
pronouns. Similarly, the verb ‘live’ is written rh rah but is pronounced
as rsh.
88                                               Unit 2: Where are you from?


     Notes
     Word-for-word translation: ‘Where are you from?’

     The Hindi equivalent of the English ‘Where are you from?’ is

       Aap      khaá       kI      hOMÆ
       ap       kahk       kc      hq?
       you      where      of      are

     The response to the English question in Hindi is

       maOM    idllaI     kI      hUá.
       mq      dillc      kc      ho.
       I       Delhi      of      am

     As we saw in the last chapter, like other possessive pronouns, kI kc
     agrees with the number and the gender of its possessor. In the above
     two sentences the subject pronoun is the possessor. Since the sub-
     jects are feminine, the feminine form kI kc is selected. It is not dif-
     ficult to guess what would happen if the subjects were masculine. If
     these sentences are uttered by males, they are

       Aap      khaá       ko      hOMÆ
       ap       kahk       ke      hq?
       you      where      of      are

       maOM     idllaI     ka      hUá.
       mq       dillc      ka      ho.
       I        Delhi      of      am

     Remember the honorific pronoun Aap ap always takes the plural form.
        Don’t be surprised if you hear someone using sao se ‘from’ instead
     of ka ka, ka ke or kI kc.

       Aap      khaá       sao            hOMÆ
       ap       kahk       se             hq?
       you      where      from           are

       maOM     idllaI     sao            hUá.
       mq       dillc      se             ho.
       I        Delhi      from           am
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                              89


Usually, an educated Hindi–English bilingual would construct
such a sentence. The important thing is to know that sao se is
invariable whereas ka ka is variable. You will learn about the invari-
able elements such as sao se later in the section on invariable
postposition.
   Notice also the placement of the English ‘from’ in the Hindi
sentence.

Postpositions

The Hindi equivalents of English ‘in Banaras’ and ‘from Delhi’ are

  banaarsa           maoM        idllaI     sao
  banaras            mg          dillc      se
  Banaras            in          Delhi      from

Notice the English prepositions placed after the noun of the preposi-
tional phrase. In other words, the word order of the prepositional
phrase is reversed in Hindi. Since the prepositional elements always
follow the noun they modify, they are called postpositions in Hindi
grammar.

Question words: ‘where’ and ‘how many/much’

From the Hindi sentence ‘Where are you from?’ it should be obvi-
ous that the Hindi word for where is khaá kahk. Like the English
question word, Hindi khaá kahk does not change its shape. It is
also not placed at the beginning of the sentence. Its usual place is
before the verb. However, this word is can be quite mobile within a
sentence.
   The Hindi equivalent of ‘how many/much’ is iktnaa kitna. This
question word agrees with its following noun in number and gender.

  iktnaa     kama
  kitna      kam            how much work
  iktnao     Baa[-
  kitne      bhac           how many brothers
  iktnaI     bahnaoM
  kitnc      bshsng         how many sisters

This question word is like a (an inflecting) possessive adjective.
90                                                Unit 2: Where are you from?


     baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                          (CD 1; 21)

     Where are you from?
     During the train journey, Kanika and Sunita become friends; they are
     ready to exchange their addresses.

     saunaIta:      yah maora pta hO.
     Sunita: ye mera pata hs.
     kinaka:   yah pta baD,a hO.
     Kanika: ye pata bahut baRa hs.
     saunaIta: haáÊ baD,a SahrÊ baD,a pta.
     Sunita: hk baRa shshsr, baRa pata.
     kinaka:   laoikna CaoTa SahrÊ CaoTa pta.
     Kanika: lekin, choTa shshsr, choTa pata.
     (both laugh)
     saunaIta: AcCaÊ ifr imalaoMgao.
     Sunita: accha, phir milgge.
     kinaka:   imalaoMgao.
     Kanika: milgge.

     Sunita: This is my address.
     Kanika: This address is very big. (i.e. long)
     Sunita: Yes, big city, big address.
     Kanika: But small city, small address!
     (both laugh)
     Sunita: Okay, (we) will meet again.
     Kanika: Okay, (we) will meet.


     SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
     pta          pata (m.)             address
     bahut        bahut                 very
     baD,a        baRa (m. adj.)        big
     Sahr         <shshsr> (m.)         city
     laoikna      lekin                 but
     CaoTa        choTa (m. adj.)       small
     ifr          phir                  again, then
     AcCa         accha (m. adj.)       good, okay
     imalanaa     milna (–ne)           to meet
     imalaoMgao   milgge                will meet
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                                91


Pronunciation
Like the word bahna bahan, the word for ‘city’ is written as Sahr shahar
but it is pronounced shshsr. However, the pronunciation of bahut
bahut does not change because h is not surrounded by the vowel a
on both sides.


Notes
Word-for-word translation

  yah      pta             bahut   baD,a     hO.
  ye       pata            bahut   baRa      hs.
  this     address         very    big       is

Notice the sentence ends with a verb and not with an adjective as is
the case with ‘This address is very long.’

Subject omission

The Hindi expression of ‘we will meet again’ is

  ifr        imalaoMgao.
  phir       milgge.
  again      will meet

The subject ‘we’ is implied. It is rarely spelled out. Normally such
subjectless expressions are considered ungrammatical in many lan-
guages including English; however, they are quite normal in Hindi.
Many languages, such as Chinese, follow the tendency to drop
subjects. Subject/pronoun dropping languages are called ‘pro-drop’
languages.


vyaakrNa vyakaraNa Grammar
Tag question
A tag question is usually tagged to a statement. The Hindi equi-
valent of ‘You are Dr Anup Patel, aren’t you?’ is very simple – just
add na na at the end of the statement. It will take care of both the
92                                               Unit 2: Where are you from?


     positive tags (e.g. ‘is it?’, ‘will you?’, ‘do you?’, etc.) and the negative
     tags (e.g. ‘isn’t it?’, ‘won’t you?’, ‘don’t you?’, etc.) attached to a
     statement in English. The only difference is that whereas English
     speakers will pause at the point where a comma is placed in the
     English sentence Hindi speakers will not do so. Therefore, no comma
     is placed between the statement and the tag. However, in both Eng-
     lish and Hindi a tag question has a rising intonation.


     Verb ‘to be’
     This section will guarantee plain sailing into the sea of different
     tenses. Once you have mastered the forms given below, your adven-
     ture into different tenses becomes more rewarding and worthwhile.
         There is a striking resemblance between the English and Hindi
     verb ‘to be’. In Hindi just as in English one cannot say ‘you am’, ‘I
     is’, ‘he am’ or ‘they is’. Different forms are used depending upon the
     person and number of the subject. The Hindi counterparts of the
     English verb ‘to be’ are given below in Magic Key 2.

     Magic Key 2

                        Singular               Plural              Honorific

        First person    hUá ho (I) am       hOM hq (we) are      –
        Second person   hO hs (you sg.) are hao ho (you pl.) are hOM hq (you
                                                                       honorific) are
        Third person    hO hs (he/she/it) is   hOM hq (they) are   –



     Certainly there are some differences between Hindi and English. In
     Hindi it is possible to say ‘you is’, provided the Hindi singular ‘you’
     tU te is selected. Of course, the second person honorific pronoun
     Aap ap always takes a plural form. As we mentioned in the first unit,
     be careful when using Hindi second person pronouns. Chances are
     you will rarely get to use the pronoun tU te and, thus, the singular
     second person form of ‘to be’.


     Present habitual actions = simple present tense
     The Hindi sentences
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                             93


  Aap      @yaa         krto      hOMÆ
  ap       kya          karte     hq?
  you      what         do        are

  maOM     banaarsa     maoM      rhtI     hUá.
  mq       banaras      mg        rshtc    ho
  I        Banaras      in        live     am

are equivalent to the English ‘What do you do?’ and ‘I live in
Banaras,’ which refer to habitual or regularly repeated acts. Look at
the verb form/phrase, and you will see that there are two main parts
of the Hindi verb form. The first, usually called the ‘main verb’, is
composed of three elements:

  kr           +t              + I
  kar          +t              +e
  stem ‘to do’ + aspect marker + gender-number marker (m. pl.)

  rh             +t              + o
  rsh            +t              +c
  stem ‘to live’ + aspect marker + gender-number marker (f. sg.)

The first element of the first part is the verb stem. The second ele-
ment is the aspect marker. The aspect marker simply shows whether
the act is completed or ongoing. At this point it is important
to understand the difference between tense and aspect. As men-
tioned just now, aspect is concerned about the ongoing, repeated
or completed state of the action whereas tense (present, past or
future) renders time information, i.e. as to what point in time the
action took place. The third element of the main verb is the same
masculine plural ending from Magic Key 1 discussed in the previous
chapter.
   The second part of the verb is called the ‘auxiliary verb’. In our
two sentences, the auxiliary verb is the same ‘to be’ verb form dis-
cussed above in Magic Key 2.
   This verb form has various technical names. The most widely
used forms are the following three: present imperfect tense, present
habitual tense and simple present tense. Here we will call it the
simple present tense. The full paradigm is given in the Grammatical
Summary.
94                                        Unit 2: Where are you from?


     Verb ‘to have’
     The Hindi expression for ‘How many brothers and sisters do you
     have?’ is

        Aapko         iktnao      Baa[-   bahnaoM      hOMÆ
        apke          kitne       bhac    bshsng       hq?
        your          how many    brothers-sisters     are

     Notice that the Hindi sentence contains neither an equivalent to the
     English verb ‘to have’ nor the subject ‘you’. In Hindi, the subject
     takes a possessive form and the verb ‘to have’ becomes the verb ‘to
     be’. As we proceed further, it will become clear that many languages
     do not have the exact equivalent of English ‘have’. This Hindi con-
     struction is used to express inseparable or non-transferable posses-
     sions (such as body parts, relationships or dearly held possessions
     such as a job, house or shop). Transferable possessions will be dealt
     with later on.


     Number and gender (plural formation
     of marked ‘nerd’ nouns)
     Now do some detective work and discover Magic Key 3 for the
     following nouns:

     Masculine
     Singular                                        Plural

     Baa[-    bhac      brother                      Baa[-      bhac     brothers
     Gar      ghar      house                        Gar        ghar     houses
     haqa     hath      hand                         haqa       hath     hands
     mad-     mard      man                          mad-       mard     men
     AadmaI   admc      man                          AadmaI     admc     men

     Feminine
     Singular                                        Plural

     bahna    bshsn     sister                       bahnaoM    bshsng   sisters
     iktaba   kitab     book                         iktabaoM   kitabg   books
     AaOrt    aurat     woman                        AaOrtoM    auratg   women
     maata    mata      mother                       maataeá    matag    mothers
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                                                      95


If you think that the masculine nouns that do not end in a remain
unchanged and the feminine nouns which do not end in c take g to
form plurals, you are right. The masculine nouns which depart from
the normal trend, i.e. those that do not end in a and the feminine
nouns that do not end in c, are called ‘marked’ nouns. We affection-
ately call them ‘nerd’ nouns as an aid to memory.

Magic Key 3

                                  Singular                    Plural

  Masculine                       non-a                       0 (zero = unchanged)
  Feminine                        non-c                       g




AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1

Pac-man has swallowed either some parts of the words or whole
words. Supply the missing part where you see the µ sign:

  maOM idllaI µ hUá. maoµ caar Baa[- µ. maora CaoTµ Baa[- iSakagaao maoM kama krµ hO. maoµ dao
  baD,µ Baa[- [MglaOD, maoM rhtµ µ. maora naama Amar µ. maOM skUla jaaµ hUá. maorµ dao bahnaµ
  BaI µ .maorµ ipta jaI BaI kama krtµ hOM. Aap µ rhto hOÆ Aapµ iktµ Baa[-–bahnaoM
  hOM. Aapµ maata jaI @yaa µ krµ hMOÆ
  mq dillc * ho. me* car bhai *. mera choT* bhac Chicago mg kam
  kar* hs. mer* do baR* bhac England mg rsht* *. mera nam amar
                                         h                 h
  *. mq school ja* ho. mer* do bshsn* b c *. mer* pita jc b c kam
                                    h
  kart* hq. ap * rshte hq? ap kit* b ac-bshsng. ap* mata jc kya *
  kar* hq?.

Exercise 2
Pair the words on the right with those on the left:

  AcCa           CaoTa
  accha          choTa
  baD,a          laD,kI
  baRa           laRkc
96                                       Unit 2: Where are you from?


       bahna      AaOrt
       bshsn      aurat
       laD,ka     baura
       laRka      bura
       AadmaI     nahIM
       admc       nahm
       haá        Baa[-
       hk         bhac

     Exercise 3
     The software system of our computer has imposed some weird system
     on the following Hindi phrases. It’s your job to correct them.
       sao       banaarsa
       se        banaras
       maoM      Sahr
       mg        shshsr
       dsa       bahna
       das       bshsn
       caar      Baa[-yaaá
       car       bhacyk
       dao       AadmaIyaaá
       do        admcyk
       iktnaa    Baa[-yaaá
       kitna     bhacyk
       pIlaa     saaD,I
       pcla      saRc

     Exercise 4
     Unscramble the following words/phrases and fill in the unscrambled
     expression in the blank spaces on the right:
       hiyeka                 ________
       shcxu                  ________
       bcRa xucsh hcu         ________   ________    ________
       repa mna               ________   ________
       deras                  ________
       kinte bhac             ________   ________
       mglieg                 ________
Unit 2: Where are you from?                                                97


Exercise 5

In this puzzle there are four Hindi words from our dialogues. Find the
words and circle them. They can be found horizontally and vertically.

     a d g a b a d z             x   s u n i y e z y x u f g
     l l k j a z x c             v   b n ma s p q w e r t y
     z x c v R a d g             a   r t y f g h a s g h j o
     r t y f i b g t             x   u s h i i z q t s k x p
     c v b n i w s x             e   d v r a t g h t a h z c
     q a z w c w s v             f   r y h n mh u i k a u c


Exercise 6               (CD 1; 23)

If you have the recording, listen to it, and then play the role of Meenu
Bharati. You can record your response.

Setting: a crowded store

AiBalaaYaa:      (bumps into Meenu) maaf, kIijayao.
maInaU:          __________________. bahut BaID, hO.
AiBalaaYaa:      saca.
maInaU:          ______________________________.
AiBalaaYaa:      AaOr maora naama AiBalaaYaa paáDo hO.
maInaU:          ____________________________.
AiBalaaYaa:      Aap idllaI kI hOMÊ naÆ
maInaU:          __________________________.

Abhilasha:       (bumps into Meenu) maf kcjiye.
Meenu:           ____________________. bahut bhcR hs.
Abhilasha:       sac.
Meenu:           ____________________.
Abhilasha:       aur mera nam Abhilasha Pande hs.
Meenu:           ____________________.
Abhilasha:       ap dillc kc hq na?
Meenu:           ____________________.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
maaf,I    mafc (f.)      apology
BaID,     bhcR (f.)      crowd
98                                    Unit 3: What would you like?




     3 Aapkao @yaa caaiheÆ
       apko kya cahiye?
          What would you like?




     By the end of this unit you should be able to:
     •   tell someone what you wish to get
     •   describe locations
     •   use some negotiation skills
     •   make reservations
     •   describe possessions (transferable)
     •   understand verb agreement with subjects and objects
     •   express physical states (e.g. fever, headache)
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                           99


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1         (CD 1; 24)

saaD,I K,rIdnaa sAR C xarCdnA Buying a saree
Meghan Ashley and Anita Sharma go to a saree shop in Jaipur. Anita
visits the shop quite regularly. After they have greeted each other,
Anita tells the shopkeeper that Meghan is visiting from London and
wants a saree.
AinataÁ      ja,ra nayao fOSana kI saaD,I idKa[e.
Anita:       zara naye fashion kc saRc dikhacye.
rajaond`Á    kaOna–saI saaD,I caaiheÆ roSamaI yaa saUtIÆ
Rajinder:    kaun sc saRc cahiye? reshmc ya setc?
AinataÁ      roSamaI.
Anita:       reshmc.
rajaond`Á    yao doiKyaoÊ Aaja kla [saka bahut irvaaja hO.doiKyaoÊ isalk iktnaa AcCa
             hO.
Rajinder:    ye dekhiye. aj-kal iska bahut rivaj hai. dekhiye, silk kitna
             accha hs!
(Rajinder shows a number of sarees. Anita asks Meghan about her
choice.)
AinataÁ      maoganaÊ Aapkao kaOna saI saaD,I psand hOÆ
Anita:       Meghan, apko kaun sc saRc pasand hs?
maoganaÁ     yao pIlaI.
Meghan: ye pclc.
(turning to Rajinder to ask the price)
AinataÁ      [saka dama @yaa hOÆ
Anita:       iska dam kya hs?
rajaond`Á    baarh saaO àpyao.
Rajinder: bara sau rupaye.
AinataÁ      zIk bata[yaoÊ yao baahr sao AayaI hOM.
Anita:       Thck bataiye, ye bahar se ayc hq.
rajaond`Á    Aaja–kla [tnaa dama hO . . . AcCaÊ gyaarh saaO.
Rajinder: aj-kal itna dam hs . . . accha, gyara sau.
AinataÁ      AcCaÊ zIk hO.
Anita:       accha Thck hs.
Anita:       Please show me a saree that is in fashion.
Rajinder:    What kind of saree (do you) desire/want? Silk(en) or
             cotton?
Anita:       Silk(en).
Rajinder:    Look at this. Nowadays it is very much in fashion.
             See how good the silk is!
100                                          Unit 3: What would you like?


      (Rajinder shows a number of sarees. Anita asks Meghan about her
      choice.)
      Anita:      Meghan, which saree do you want?
      Meghan: (I want) this yellow (one).
      (Turning to Rajinder to ask the price)
      Anita:      What is its price?
      Rajinder: Twelve hundred rupees.
      Anita:      Please tell (me) the right (price); she is the visitor. (lit.
                  she has come from abroad)
      Rajinder: This is the price nowadays . . . okay, eleven hundred
                  (rupees).
      Anita:      Okay, (that) is fine.

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      j,ara             zara                little, somewhat
      nayaa             naya (m. adj.)      new
      nayao             naye                new
      saaD,I            saRc                saree
      idKanaa           dikhana [+ne]       to show
      idKa[yao          dikhaiye            please show
      kaOna saa         kaun sa (m. adj.)   which one
      kaOna saI         kaun sc             which one
      caaihyao/caaihe   cahiye              desire, want
      roSama            resham (m.)         silk
      roSamaI           reshmc              silken
      yaa               ya                  or
      saUt              set (m.)            cotton
      saUtI             setc                cotton (adj.)
      doKnaa            dekhna (+ne)        to see
      doiKyao/doiKe     dekhiye             please see
      Aajakla           aj-kal              nowadays
      irvaaja           rivaj (m.)          custom
      Aapkao            ap-ko               to you
      psand             pasand (f.)         choice, liking
      pIlaa             pcla (m. adj.)      yellow
      pIlaI             pclc (f. adj.)      yellow
      dama              dam (m.)            price
      baarh             <bara>              twelve
      saaO              sau                 hundred
      àpyao             rupaye (m.)         Rupees (Indian currency)
      bata[yao/bata[e   bataiye             please tell
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                101


baahr            bahar              outside
AayaI/Aa[-       ayc                came
[tnaa            itna (m. adj.)     this much
gyaarh           <gyara>            eleven


Pronunciation
The numerals eleven and twelve are written gyaarh gyarah and baarh
barah, but are pronounced gyaara gyara and baara bara in Standard
Hindi. In the other varieties of Hindi, they are pronounced gyars
and bars, respectively.
   The Hindi word for ‘silken’ is written as roSamaI reshamc but the
vowel A a is dropped. Therefore, it is pronounced roSmaI reshmc. For
the time being, satisfy yourself with this observation. The rule for
dropping A a is given in Script Unit 4.


Notes
Rules of negotiation: direct and indirect strategies
The rules of bargaining or negotiating can be very complex indeed,
and are beyond the scope of this book. However, one strategy
deserves special mention. Towards the end of the conversation, the
subject of visitors is brought up. Since Indian culture shows a great
deal of sensitivity towards foreign visitors, this is a signal to request
a discount. In this case, the shopkeeper appropriately obliges.
   It is also quite common to ask the price indirectly by saying:

Asking the price (directly)            Asking how much the total comes
                                       to (indirectly)

[saka dama           @yaa     hOÆ      iktnao   [pOsao]        hueÆ
iska    dam          kya  hs?          kitne    paise          hue?
Its     price        what is           how much money          happened
yao     iktnao       ka       hOÆ      iktnaa   huAa/haogaaÆ
ye      kitne        ka       hs?      kitna    hua/hoga?
this    how much     of       is       how much happened/will happen
[sakI kImat          @yaa     hOÆ
iskc    kcmat        kya  hs?
its     price        what is
102                                              Unit 3: What would you like?


      Politeness bug
      As we saw in the last unit, Hindi is a very rich language from the
      point of view of politeness.
         When ja,ra zara ‘little’, ‘somewhat’ is used at the beginning of a
      request, its main function is politeness. It is a little like the English ‘I
      do not want to impose on you but . . .’. By adding ja,ra zara, Hindi
      speakers convey the meaning ‘I want to put as little burden as pos-
      sible on you by my request’. ja,ra zara remains invariable.

      caahnaa cahna ‘want’ vs caaihe cahiye ‘desire/want’
      Just as the English expression ‘What do you want?’ would be
      considered less polite than ‘What would you like to have?’, similarly
      in Hindi

         Aap      kaOna           saI   saaD,I       caahtI       hOMÆ
         ap       kaun    sc            saRc         cahtc        hq
         you      what kind of          saree        want         are

      would be considered less polite than

         Aapkao       kaOna saI             saaD,I      caaiheÆ
         apko        kaun sc           saRc      cahiye?
         you-to      what kind of      saree     desire
         (lit. What kind of saree is desirable to you?)

      In the first sentence the subject Aap ap indicates a deliberate subject
      whereas in the second sentence the subject Aapkao apko is an experi-
      encer one. Sometimes politeness is achieved in Hindi by means of
      experiencer subjects. In other words, the verb caaihe cahiye is the
      relatively polite counterpart of English ‘to want’ (and Hindi caahnaa
      cahna ‘to want’) because it always selects an experiencer subject.
      Experiencer subjects render polite reading in some contexts. Here-
      after the Hindi verb caaihe cahiye will be glossed as ‘want’ because
      ‘desire’ is not its best translation.
         For more information, see the discussion of the experiencer
      subject in the next unit.

      Word-for-word translation
      The Hindi equivalent of English ‘It is very much in fashion’ is
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                 103


   [saka    bahut           irvaaja         hO.
   iska     bahut           rivaj           hs.
   its      very            custom          is

Similarly, the English expression ‘This (she) is a visitor’ is realized in
Hindi as

   yao              baahr             sao             Aa[-   hMO.
   ye               bahar             se              ayc    hq.
   this (hon.)      outside           from            came   are

In other words, the Hindi expression is literally ‘She has come from
outside.’ The past tense will be dealt with later on; for the time being
memorize this sentence and learn to make number and gender changes
in Aa[- ayc (Aayaa aya for masculine singular subjects, Aae /Aayao aye for
masculine plural and Aa[- /M AayaIM aym for feminine plural) and person
and number changes in the ‘to be’ form.

Polite commands
The Hindi equivalent of English ‘please show’ and ‘please see’ are

   idKa[e                                   doiKe
   dikha-iye                                dekh-iye
   show-imperative (polite)                 see-imperative (polite)

The other examples of polite commands you have encountered
earlier are:

   kihe                                     sauinae
   kah-iye                                  sun-iye
   say-imperative (polite)                  listen-imperative (polite)

In short, iye is added to a verbal stem to form polite commands. It
is called the ‘polite imperative’ in grammatical literature.

No word for ‘please’
There is really no exact equivalent of the English word ‘please’. The
most important way of expressing polite requests is by means of the
polite verb form, i.e. by adding -iye to a verb stem. If one looks for
word-for-word Hindi equivalents of ‘please’, there are two: kRpyaa
kripya or maohrbaanaI krko meharbanc karke; even then the verbal form
104                                                     Unit 3: What would you like?


      with -iye must be retained. kRpyaa kripya and maohrbaanaI krko meharbanc
      karke mean ‘kindly’ in Hindi.

      Context
      Note the use of the change in meaning of Hindi kaOna saa kaun sa
      ‘which one’ in the following two contexts: when a saree has yet to be
      shown by the shopkeeper

          kaOna saI             saaD,I     caaiheÆ
          kaun sc       saRc cahiye?
          what kind of saree want
          What kind of saree do (you) want?

      and in the context of choosing a saree from a set of sarees which are
      being shown to the customer

          Aapkao        kaOna      saI     saaD,I     psaMd           hOÆ
          apko    kaun sc       saRc                  pasand          hs?
          you-to which one saree                      choice/liking   is
          Which saree do (you) like?

      Subject omission
          kaOna       saI         saaD,I    caaiheÆ
          kaun sc         saRc cahiye?
          what kind of saree want
          What kind of saree do (you) want?


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                 (CD 1; 26)

      Booking a flight
      John Smith goes to the airline booking office to make an airline reser-
      vation for Jaipur (the Pink City). He talks with the agent.

      jaana:          jayapur kI ek iTkT caaihe.
      John: jaipur kc ek TikaT (ticket) cahiye.
      ejaMoT: kaOna sao idna ko ilayaoÆ
      Agent: kaun se din ke liye?
      jaana:  kla ko ilae.
      John    kal ke liye.
Unit 3: What would you like?                                       105


ejaoMT:     kmPyaUTr pr doKta hUáÊ hO yaa nahIM.
Agent: kampuTar (computer) par dekhta ho, hs ya nahm.
jaana: saubah kI F,laa[T caaihyao.
john:  suba kc flaiT ( flight) cahiye.
ejaMoT      iTkT hO.
Agent:      Ticket (ticket) hs.
jaana:      tao dIijae. F,laa[T kba calatI hOÆ
John        to dcjiye. flight ( flight) kab caltc hs?
ejaoMT:     saubah dsa bajao .
Agent:      suba das baje.
jaana:      maoro pasa kOSa nahIM hO.
John:       mere pas cash nahm hs.
ejaMoT:     tao k`OiDT kaD- dIijae.
Agent:      to krsDiT karDa (credit card ) dcjiye.
John:  (I) want one ticket for Jaipur
agent: For which day?
John:  For tomorrow.
Agent: (I) must look at the computer (to see), whether or not (I
       have it). (lit. [it] is or not).
John: (I) need a morning flight.
Agent: (I) have a ticket.
John: Then (please) give (it to me). When does the flight leave?
Agent: 10 o’clock (in the) morning.
John: I do not have cash.
Agent: Then use a credit card. (lit. give a credit card)

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
idna        din (m.)              day
ko ilayao   ke liye               for
kla         kal                   yesterday, tomorrow
pr          par                   on, at
doKnaa      dekhna (+ne)          to see
saubah      <suba>                morning
tao         to                    then
donaa       dena (+ne)            to give
dIijae      dcjiye                please give
kba         kab                   when (question word)
calanaa     calna (–ne)           to leave, to walk
dsa         das                   ten
bajao       baje                  o’clock
pasa        pas                   near, possession (have)
106                                           Unit 3: What would you like?


      Pronunciation
      The word for morning is written as saubah subah, but is pronounced
      suba saubaa.
         In the borrowed words from English such as computer and ticket,
      the English t is pronounced with the retroflex T T (see chapter on
      Hindi writing system and pronunciation for the pronunciation of
      Hindi retroflex sounds).


      Notes
      Word-for-word translation
         jayapur   kI        iTkT
         jaipur kc        TikaT
         Jaipur of (f.) ticket (f.)
         A ticket for Jaipur. (lit. Jaipur’s ticket)

      The borrowed English words ‘ticket’ and ‘computer’ have been
      assimilated into Hindi and assigned feminine and masculine gender,
      respectively.
         The equivalent Hindi expression for ‘morning flight’ is

         saubah         kI          F,laa[T
         suba           kc (f.)     flaiT
         morning        of          flight

      Guess the gender of ‘flight’ in Hindi. Of course, it is feminine (clue:
      the feminine form kc).

      Short form of tba tab ‘then’
      The short form of tba tab ‘then’ is tao to, as in

         tao       dIijae
         to        dcjiye
         then      please give

      Compound and oblique (peer pressure)
      postpositions
      Observe the structure of the English preposition in Hindi:
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                  107


   (noun)                  postposition         postposition
   kla                     ko                   ilae
   kal                     ke                   liye
   tomorrow                of                   for

As we proceed further we will introduce the concept of the ‘oblique’
case in Hindi, which I affectionately call the ‘peer pressure’ case.
Languages do show the effects of peer pressure! You will notice, as
we go on, that the compound postpositions will either begin with
ko ke or kI kc, but never with ka ka. The reason is that ka ka and
kI kc have to be followed by another postposition in the com-
pound postposition, and the succeeding postposition influences the
preceding one. In the above expression ilae liye changes ka ka to
ko ke. That is, the postposition ending a becomes e.
   The oblique effect does not last to the preceding postposition but
to the phrase as a whole.

   kaOna          saa            idna
   kaun           sa             din
   which                         day (m.)

Notice that the saa sa part of the question word ‘which’ agrees in
number and gender with the following noun, i.e. idna din ‘day’, which
is masculine singular. Now let us expand this phrase by adding the
Hindi compound postposition ko ilae ke liye

   kaOna          sao            idna          ko      ilae
   kaun           se             din           ke      liye
   which                         day (m.)      of      for

Now the peer pressure of ilae liye not only extends to ko ke but all the
way to sao se. The way ka ka gives in to the peer pressure of ilae liye is
similar to the way saa sa gives in to sao se. As a matter of fact, even the
noun idna din is affected too. The only exceptions are the marked
nouns (or nerd nouns: remember this distinction from the last chap-
ter), where the effect does not surface. However, if we replace the
marked noun with an unmarked noun, laD,ka laRka ‘boy’, you can
see a clear change.

   kaOna    sao         laD,ko          ko   ilae
   kaun se laRke                        ke   liye
   which      boy (m.)                  of   for
   For which boy
108                                            Unit 3: What would you like?


      Although laD,ka laRka ‘boy’ changes to laD,ko laRke under peer pres-
      sure, its meaning does not change. It still keeps its singular identity.
      Remember, people usually give in to peer pressure only superficially!

      Separable or transferable possessions
      In the last unit we dealt with non-transferable and inseparable
      possessions, i.e. expressions such as ‘I have four brothers.’ Let us
      turn our attention to separable possessions, as in

        maoro    pasa   kOSa   nahIM     hO.
        mere pas cash nahm hs
        my     near cash not is
        I do not have cash.

      Similarly, in Hindi the expression ‘You have a ticket’ is

        Aapko pasa      iTkT      hO.
        apke pas     TikaT hs.
        your near ticket is
        You have a ticket.

      In other words, in the case of separable possession the subject
      receives ko pasa ke pas compound postposition and, subsequently,
      the following changes take place. Notice ko ke makes the subject
      oblique masculine possessive.

        maOM       ko pasa        maoro pasa
        mq      + ke pas ⇒        mere pas        I have
        Aap        ko pasa        Aapko pasa
        ap      + ke pas ⇒        ap ke pas       You have


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                       (CD 1; 28)

      Da^@Tr ko Paasa jaanaa DAkTar ke pAs jAnA
      A visit to the doctor
      Kushwant Singh is under the spell of cold weather. He has a fever and
      headache. He goes to his doctor, Charan Chaturvedi. After exchanging
      greetings, Kushwant tells Charan the purpose of his visit.
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                                      109


kuSavaMt:           Da^@Tr saaihbaÊ mauJakao kuC bauK,ar hO.
Kushwant: DakTar sahib, mujhko kuch buxar hs.
carna:         kba sao hOÆ
Charan:        kab se hs?
kuSavaMt:      kla rat sao.
Kushwant: kal rat se.
carna:         isar–dd- BaI hO.
Charan:        sir-dard bhc hs?
kuSavaMt:      jaI haá.
Kushwant: jc hk.
(putting the thermometer in Kushwant’s mouth)
carna:         qarmaamaITr lagaa[e.
Charan:        thermometer lagaiye.
(after taking the thermometer from Kushwant’s mouth)
carna:         qaaoD,a bauK,ar hO . . . yah dvaa[- idna maMo dao baar laIijayao . . . jaldI zIk
                    hao jaayaoMgao.
Charan:             thoRa buxar hs . . . ye davac din mg do bar lcjiye . . .
                    jaldc Thck ho jagge.

Kushwant: Doctor sir, I have some fever.
Charan:        Since when (i.e. is it)?
Kushwant: Since last night.
Charan:        (Do you have) a headache too?
Kushwant: Yes.
Charan:        Put the thermometer (into your mouth)
(putting the thermometer into Kushwant’s mouth)
Charan:        (You have) a little fever . . . please take this medicine
               twice a day. (You) will be fine.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
Da^@Tr              DakTar                   Doctor
saaihba             <sahib>                  sir
mauJakao            mujh ko                  to me
kuC                 kuch                     some
bauK,ar             buxar (m.)               fever
kba                 kab                      when
kla                 kal                      yesterday/tomorrow
rat                 rat (f.)                 night
isar                sir (m.)                 head
dd-                 dard (m.)                pain
lagaanaa            lagana (+ne)             to fix, to put into, to stick
110                                                               Unit 3: What would you like?


      lagaa[e/lagaa[yao                lagaiye                please fix, put into, stick
      qaaoD,a                          thoRa (m. adj.)        little
      dvaa[-                           davac (f.)             medicine
      dao                              do                     two
      baar                             bar (f.)               time, turn
      laonaa                           lena (+ne)             to take
      laIijae/laIijayao                lcjiye                 please take
      jaldI                            jaldc                  soon, quickly
      hao jaaeágao/jaayaoMgao          ho jagge               will become


      Pronunciation
      The word saaihba sahib also has other variants: sahab saahba and more
      colloquial saaba sab.


      Notes
      saaihba sahib
      The original meaning of Hindi saaihba sahib is ‘master’ or ‘lord’. This
      word is more formal than the English ‘sir’. In highly formal
      addresses, saaihba sahib can be substituted for the Hindi jaI jc. Usually
      it is used with last names and titles (e.g. jaja jaj ‘judge’; sahib). The
      other two variants are: sahab saahba and sab saaba.

      ‘Since’
      The Hindi equivalent of ‘since’ is the postposition sao se ‘from’,
      e.g.

           kba                   sao           kla                           rat     sao
           kab      se                         kal                           rat     se
           when     from                       yesterday                     night   from
           Since when                          Since last night


      ‘Tell me why’ column
      savaala:                  ihndustanaI AaOrtoM ibandI @yaaoM lagaatI hMOÆ
      saval:                    hindustanc auratg bindc kyõ lagatc hq?
      Question:                 Why do Indian women put a dot (on their foreheads)?
Unit 3: What would you like?                                                111


Circle the correct response:

1 singar                    isaMgaar         (for) make up
2 shadc-shuda hs            SaadI–Sauda hO   (to show she) is married
3 donõ                      daonaaoM         (for) both (reasons)

daonaaoM
      javab:  3 donõ daonaaoM
      Answer: 3 both

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
Baart         bharat (m.)           India
ihndustana    hindustan (m.)        India
BaartIya      bharatcya             Indian
ihndustanaI   hindustanc            Indian
savaala       saval (m.)            question
ibandI        bindc (f.)            dot
@yaaoM        kyõ                   why
lagaanaa      lagana (+ne)          to attach, to fix
javaaba       javab (m.)            answer
isaMgaar      singar (m.)           make up
SaadISauda    shadc-shuda           married
daonaaoM      donõ                  both


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 4 (CD 1; 30)

maj,aak mazAk Humour column
Two thieves are being interrogated in a Delhi Police Station. The
inspector is interrogating the thieves and his assistant is taking notes.

[MspO@Tr:        tumhara naamaÆ
Inspector: tumhara nam?
caaor:        baOnarjaI.
Thief:        Banerjc.
(inspector now turns to the other)
[MspO@Tr :    tumhara naamaÆ
Inspector: tumhara nam?
caaor:        caOTrjaI.
Thief:        Chatterjc.
(inspector talks to both thieves)
112                                                   Unit 3: What would you like?


      [MspO@Tr:         caaorI krto hao AaOr naama ko saaqa ‘jaI’ lagaato hao.
      Inspector: corc karte ho aur nam ke sath ‘jc’ lagate ho.
      (turning to his assistant)
      [MspO@Tr:     [naka naama ilaiKyaoÊ baOnar AaOr caOTr.
      Inspector: inka nam likhiye, Baner aur Chatter.

      Inspector: Your name?
      Thief:        BanerjC.
      (inspector now turns to the other)
      Inspector: Your name?
      Thief:        ChatterjC.
      (inspector talks to both thieves)
      Inspector: (You) steal and use ‘jC’ with your name.
      (turning to his assistant)
      Inspector: Write their names, Baner and Chatter.

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      caaorI krnaa       corc karna (+ne)          to steal
      ilaKnaa            likhna (+ne)              to write
      ko saaqa           ke sath                   with
      lagaanaa           lagana (+ne)              to attach, to fix
      ilaiKyao/ilaiKe    likhiye                   please write


      Note (cultural)
      Some common last names in the state of Bengal end in jaI –jc. How-
      ever, this jaI jc is not an honorific as in Hindi.


      vyaakrNa vyakaraNa Grammar
      caaihe cAhiye and verb agreement
      The verb caaihe cahiye is a frozen verb. It agrees neither with a subject
      nor with an object in Standard Hindi.


      Simple present tense: subject–verb
      agreement
      As pointed out earlier, the verb agrees with the subject in person,
      number and gender. The first part of the verb (called the ‘main verb’)
Unit 3: What would you like?                                              113


agrees in number and gender, and the second part of the verb (called
the ‘auxiliary verb’) agrees in person and number with the subject.

   Flaa[T            kba             calatI          hOÆ
   flight      kab    caltc         hs?
   flight (f.) when move/walk is
   When does the flight leave?
   (lit. when does the flight walk/move?)


Object–verb agreement (postposition
syndrome)
   Aapkao        saaD,I                psand                hOÆ
   apko     saRc       pasand                               hs?
   you-to saree (f.) choice/liking                          is
   Do you like the saree?

Note that, unlike in English, the Hindi verb does not agree with the
subject. Instead, it agrees with the object. The rule of thumb is that
whenever the subject is followed by any postposition, the verb does
not agree with it. Recall the ‘have’ construction:

   maoro      caar        Baa[-                      hOM.
   mere car bhac                                     hq
   my     four brothers (m. pl.)                     are
   I have four brothers.

In the above sentence, the verb form is not hUá ho, indicating that the
verb does not agree with the subject. The verb agrees with Baa[- bhac
‘brothers’ and takes the plural ending.

   maoro      pasa        saaiD,yaaá          hOM.
   mere pas saRikyk                           hq
   my     near sarees                         are
   I have sarees.

Similarly, the verb agrees with saaiD,yaaá saRik, which is plural.
  How about the expression ‘I have some fever’?

   mauJakao     kuC               bauKar      hO.
   mujhko kuch buxar                          hs
   me-to some fever                           is
   I have some fever.
114                                          Unit 3: What would you like?


      Once again the verb does not agree with the subject because it is
      followed by the postposition kao ko. Instead, it agrees with ‘fever’.
         In fact, if both the subject and the verb are followed by a
      postposition, the verb never agrees with either. In this case, it stays
      masculine singular (called ‘default agreement’).


      When does the subject take a postposition?
      Hindi verbs such as psaMd haonaa pasand hona ‘to like’ and caaihe cahiye ‘to
      want’ select the kao ko postposition with their subject. You will need
      to remember which verb takes which postposition with the subject.
      For example, you will need to know that the English verb ‘to have’
      takes three different postpositions in the Hindi subject:

      Subject postposition               Possession

      ko pasa        ke pas              separable, transferable
      kaÊ koÊ kI     ka, ke, kc          inseparable
      kao            ko                  physical states (such as fever, headache)



      AByaasa abhyas Exercises
      Exercise 1

      Translate the following sentences into Hindi according to the model
      example. (Remember that Hindi does not have articles so the art-
      icles ‘a’, ‘an’ and ‘the’ cannot be translated into Hindi.)

          Model
          Aapkao      iktaba caaihe
          apko        kitab cahiye.     You want a book.
          mauJakao    iktaba caaihe
          mujhko      kitab cahiye.     I want a book.

      1   I want a ticket for Jaipur.
      2   Do you want medicine?
      3   I want two houses.
      4   I want a car in my garage.     (garage: use the English word)
      5   You want this beautiful saree. (beautiful: saundr sundar)
Unit 3: What would you like?                                            115


Exercise 2

Fill in the blanks by making an appropriate choice from the follow-
ing Hindi subjects.

  maora         maoro      maorI       maoro pasa     mauJakao
  mera          mere       merc        mere pas       mujhko

1 __________ ek bahna hO.
  __________ek bshsn hs.
2 ____________dao Baa[- hMO.
  ___________do bhac hq.
3 __________ ek kmPyaUTr hO.
  __________ ek computer hs.
4 ___________hala zIk hO.
  ___________hal Thck hs.
5 __________ isar–dd- hO.
  __________ sir-dard hs.
6 ___________ kama caaihe.
  ___________kam cahiye.
7 ___________ laD,ka Gar laota hO.
  ___________laRka ghar leta hs.


Exercise 3

Match the parts of the sentences given on the right with those on the
left to make a complete sentence.

  mauJakao              Gar maoM iktnao AadmaI hOMÆ
  mujhko                ghar mg kinte admc hq?

  maoro pasa            @yaa hOÆ
  mere pas              kya hs?
  Aapko                 bauKar hO.
  apke                  buxar hs.

  maora Sahr            Aapko ilayao hO.
  mera shshsr           apke liye hs.

  yao F,laa[T           bahut sauMdr hO.
  ye flight             bahut sundar hs.
116                                       Unit 3: What would you like?


        [saka dama        àpyao hOM.
        iska dam          rupiye hq.

      Exercise 4           (CD 1; 31)

      Listen to what the waiter is saying in the recording and answer each
      question in Hindi. Your part of the answer is given below in English.
      After the beep there is a pause for you to reply. After your reply,
      listen to the correct recorded version. To distinguish you from the
      waiter, your voice is represented by a female voice.
          Use the glossary to familiarize yourself with food items.

      Waiter:
      You:       (appropriate greeting)
      Waiter:
      You:       I am fine.
      Waiter:
      You:       No, what is the special for lunch?
      Waiter:
      You:       The vegetarian special is fine. What is it?
      Waiter:
      You:    I need my daal a little spicy. (No need to translate ‘my’
              here.)
      Waiter: zIk hO Thck hs.
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                               117




4 Aapko SaaOk @yaa hOMÆ
  apke shauk
  kya hq?
       What are your hobbies?




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   talk about your and others’ hobbies and interests
  •   talk about your and others’ likes and dislikes
  •   manage some more expressions of health and ailments
  •   learn expressions with ‘generally’
  •   form derived adjectives
  •   note asymmetry between English and Hindi expressions
118                                                  Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                                       (CD 1; 32)

      Aapko SaaOk @yaa hOMÆ Apke shauk kyA hQ?
      What are your hobbies?
      Professor James Jones, an internationally acclaimed expert on inter-
      national adverstising, is being profiled in an ethnic Indian newspaper
      from California. After talking about his research, the interviewer,
      Y. Malik, wants to report Professor Jones’ interests to his readers

      mailak:     @yaa Aap Baart jaato hOMÆ
      Malik:      kya ap bharat jate hq?
      jaaonj,a:   jaI haáÊ k[- baar.
      Jones:      jc hk kac bar.
      mailak:     AaPakao ihndustanaI Kanaa psand hOÆ
      Malik:      apko hindustanc khana pasand hs?
      jaaonj,a:   jaI haáÊ tndUrI icaknaÊ Daosaa . . . vaOsao samaaosaa BaI psand hO.
      Jones:      jc hk, tanderc cikan (tandoori chicken), Dosa (dosa) . . .
                  vsse samosa bhc bahut pasand hs.
      mailak:     Aapko SaaOk @yaa–@yaa hOMÆ
      Malik:      apke shauk kya-kya hq?
      jaaonj,a:   mauJakao tOrnao ka SaaOk hOÊ [sako Alaavaa BaartIya saMgaIt ka BaI SaaOk hO.
      Jones:      mujh ko tsrne ka shauk hs, iske alava bharatcya sargct ka
                  bhc shauk hs.
      mailak:     gaanao ka BaIÆ
      Malik:      gane ka bh c ?
      jaaonj,a:   ja,$rÊ maoro gaanao pr maoro baccao hOD f,aona lagaato hOM.
      Jones:      zarer, mere gane se mere bacce hsD fon (head phone)
                  lagate hq.
      mailak:     vaah vaah.
      Malik:      vah, vah.

      Malik:      Do you visit India (quite frequently)?
      Jones:      Yes, quite often. (lit. several times)
      Malik:      Do you like Indian food?
      Jones:      Yes, tandoori chicken, dosa . . . in addition (I) like samosas
                  very much.
      Malik:      What are your hobbies?
      Jones:      I am fond of swimming; besides this, (I) am fond of Indian
                  music.
      Malik:      (Fond) of singing too?
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                           119


Jones:        Of course, my children put on headphones (because of) my
              singing.
              (lit. (my) children put on head phones from my singing)
Malik:        Excellent! (i.e. what an excellent sense of humour!)

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
jaanaa         jana (–ne)                 to go
k[-            kac                        several
Kanaa          khana (m.), v (+ne)        food (n.), to eat (v.)
vaOsao         vsse                       otherwise, in addition
SaaOk          shauk (m.)                 hobby, fondness, interest
tOrnaa         tsrna (–ne)                to swim
saMgaIt        sargct (m.)                music
ko Alaavaa     ke <alava>                 beside, in addition to
gaanaa         gana (m.); v. (+ne)        song (n.); to sing (v.)
ja,$r          zarer                      of course, certainly
pr             par                        on, at
vaah           vah                        ah!, excellent!, bravo!


Pronunciation
Alaavaa alava is also pronounced as [laavaa ilava.

Notes
The experiential (dative) subject: (kao ko-subjects)
The Hindi equivalent of the English ‘I am fond of swimming’ is

   mauJakao       tOOrnao            ka       SaaOk          hO.
   mujhko         tsrne              ka       shauk          hs
   me-to          swimming           of       fondness       is

In English ‘I’ is the subject of the sentence. However, in Hindi
the equivalent of the English ‘I’ is mauJakao mujhko ‘to me’. Such a
distinction is very important in South Asian languages. The nomin-
ative subjects (e.g. ‘I’) denote volitional/deliberate subjects, as in
the English ‘I met him.’ The experiential (ko kao) subjects are non-
volitional/non-deliberate, as in the English ‘I ran into him.’ kao ko
subjects emphasize something happening without any deliberate
effort being made. In other words, expressions such as the following
are expressed in a slightly different fashion:
120                                     Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      English                   Hindi

      I am fond of swimming     The fondness of swimming is to me.
      You want a ticket         The desire of a ticket is to you.
      I have some fever.        Some fever is to me.
      She likes this book.      The choice of this book is (i.e. experienced by)
                                  to her.

      The experiencer subjects receive the kao ko postposition in Hindi.
      Recall the postposition syndrome of Hindi verbs which refuse to
      agree with any element that contains a postposition. As a result, the
      verb ‘to be’ in Hindi does not agree with the kao ko subject. Instead,
      SaaOk shauk ‘fondness’ becomes the element of agreement.
           There are two other terms for experiential subjects – dative sub-
      jects and kao ko subjects. We will call them experiential subjects in
      this book.

      Verbal nouns (infinitive verbs)
      Now note the status of the word ‘swimming’ in the English sentence:
      ‘I am fond of swimming.’ The word ‘swimming’ functions like a
      noun in the sentence. As a matter of fact, one could replace it with a
      noun, e.g. ‘I am fond of chocolate.’ The only difference is that ‘choco-
      late’ is a noun to begin with and ‘swimming’ is derived from the verb
      ‘swim’ by adding ‘-ing’ to it. Such derived nouns are called verbal
      nouns or gerunds. We will call them verbal nouns throughout this
      book.
         Hindi does not distinguish verbal nouns and infinitive forms, e.g.
      ‘to swim’. You get two for one. Examples of Hindi verbal nouns or
      infinitive forms are given below:

      Verb stems                            Verbal nouns/infinitive verbs

      kr     kar    do                      krnaa     karna    to do/doing
      Aa     a      come                    Aanaa     ana      to come/coming
      jaa    ja     go                      jaanaa    jana     to go/going
      doK    dekh   see                     doKnaa    dekhna   to see/seeing
      bata   bata   tell                    batanaa   batana   to tell/telling
      tOr    tsr    swim                    tOrnaa    tsrna    to swim/swimming
      Ka     kha    eat                     Kanaa     khana    to eat/eating
      gaa    ga     sing                    gaanaa    gana     to sing/singing
      ilaK   likh   write                   ilaKnaa   likhna   to write/writing
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                  121


You must have discovered by now that the only counterpart of the
English infinitive ‘to’ (as in ‘to leave’) and the verbal noun marker
‘-ing’ (as in ‘leaving’) in Hindi is naa na. It is like English ‘-ing’ in the
sense that it follows a verbal stem rather than the English infinitive
marker ‘to’, which precedes a verbal stem rather than following it.

Oblique verbal nouns

Remember the peer-pressure influence of postposition on the words
in a phrase? See the section on ‘compound and oblique postposition’
in case you have forgotten it.
   Now consider the Hindi counterpart of the English ‘of swim-
ming’, as in ‘I am fond of swimming’:

   tOrnao              ka
   tsrne               ka
   swimming            of

Under peer pressure from the postposition ka ka, the Hindi verbal
noun tOrnaa tsrna ‘swimming’ undergoes a change exactly like the noun
laD,ka laRka: it becomes tOrnao tsrne. Study the following sentences
carefully. Do you see the same change?

   mauJakao   gaanao         ka SaaOk             hO.
   mujhko gane       ka shauk                     hs.
   me-to singing of fondness                      is
   I am fond of singing.

   mauJakao   Kanao         ka SaaOk          hO.
   mujhko khane ka shauk                      hs.
   me-to eating of fondness                   is
   I am fond of eating.

   Aapkao     maUvaI        doKnao     ka SaaOk         hO.
   apko    movie dekhne ka shauk                        hs.
   you-to movie seeing of fondness                      is
   You are fond of watching movies.

   Aapkao     Kanao         ka SaaOk         hO.
   apko    khane ka shauk    hs.
   you-to eating of fondness is
   You are fond of eating.
122                                          Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      Yes–no questions with @yaa kya

      In Unit 1, we showed you how to change a statement into a yes–no
      question with a mere change of intonation. One can also place @yaa
      kya in front of a statement and form a yes–no question from it.
      (Yes, this is the same word @yaa kya that means ‘what’!) Even if @yaa
      kya is placed at the beginning of a sentence, the rising question
      intonation is imperative. Since it is difficult to show intonation in
      writing, @yaa kya is more prevalent in written Hindi, and its omission
      is common in speech.
          The statement

        Aap    Baart     jaato hOM.
        ap   bharat jate       hq.
        you India go           are
        You go to India.

      becomes a yes–no question with the addition of @yaa kya to its front:

        @yaa   Aap     Baart   jaato hOMÆ
        kya ap    bharat jate hq?
        (Q) you India go         are
        Do you go to India [often/regularly]?

      You do not need any verb forms at the beginning of a yes–no ques-
      tion in Hindi.


      Reduplication of question words

      The repetition of a question word is quite common in Hindi. In
      many languages of South East Asia repetition indicates plurality.
      Much the same is true of Hindi.

        Aapko SaaOk                   @yaa     @yaa   hOMÆ
        apke shauk               kya     kya hq?
        your interests/hobbies what what are
        What are your interests/hobbies?

      In English you cannot repeat the question word ‘what’ even if you
      know that the person in question has many interests. However,
      the repetition of @yaa kya has a ‘listing’ function, and thus asks the
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                                       123


person to give a list of more than one interest from the viewpoint of
the speaker.
   Similarly, if someone asks in Hindi

    Aap    khaá       khaá        jaato hOMÆ
    ap   kahk    kahk   jate hq?
    you where where go        are
    What places do you go to?

the speaker has reason to believe that the listener goes (often/
regularly) to more than one place.


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                     (CD 1; 34)

BaartIya iflmaoM bhArtCya filmg Indian films
India is the largest producer of films in the world. More movies are
produced by the Bombay film industry (Bollywood) than by Holly-
wood. It is no wonder, therefore, that Hindi films dictate social conver-
sation and are an excellent mode of expressing agreement–disagreement,
likes–dislikes, and social and political thoughts. In this dialogue, the
topic of discussion is Hindi films. The participants are Akbar Ali and
Suhas Ranjan. Suhas saw the movie Black and he is ready to express
his delight over it.

sauhasa:    ‘blaOk’ maorI mana–psand iflma hO.
Suhas:      Black merc man-pasand film hs.
Akbar:      vah kOsaoÆ
Akbar:      vo ksse?
sauhasa:    gaanao bahut AcCo hOÊ khanaI AaOr eokiTMga BaI Saanadar hO.
Suhas:      gane bahut acche hq, kahanc aur acting bhc shandar hs.
Akbar:      ihndI iflmaoM tao mauJakao ibalkula psand nahIM. isaf- f,ama-Ulaa.
Akbar:      Hindi filmG to mujhko bilkul pasand nahm. sirf formula.
Sauhasa:    laoikna yah f,amaU-laa iflma nahIMÊ [saka Andaja, AaOr hO.
Suhas:      lekin ye formula film nahm, iska andaz aur hs.
Akbar:      saba ihndI iflmaoM ek–saI haotI hOMÊ laD,ka laD,kI sao imalata hOÊ daonaaoM maoM Pyaar
            haota hOÊ ifr Klanaayak Aata hO.
Akbar: sab Hindi filmG ek-sc hotc hq, laRka laRkc se milta hs,
          donõ mg pyar hota hs, phir khalnayak ata hs.
(Suhas interrupts)
124                                               Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      sauhasa:     AaOr daonaaoM kI SaadI haotI hO. jaI nahIMÊ yah eosaI iflma nahIM.
      Suhas: aur donõ kc shadc hotc hs. jc nahm, ye ssc film nahm.
      Akbar: tao piScama kI nakla haogaI.
      Akbar: to pashcim kc nakal hogc.
      sauhasa : tao Aap ko #,yaala sao isa,f- piScamaI iflmaoM AcCI haotI hOMÆ
      Suhas: to ap ke xayal se sirf pashcimc filmG acchc hotc hq?
      Akbar: maOM yah nahIM khtaÊ puranaI ihndI iflmaoM AcCI haotI hOM.
      Akbar: mq ye nahm kshta, puranc hindc filmg acchc hotc hq.
      (Ajit Singh patiently listens to this discussion and intervenes:)
      AjaIt:    iflma kI baat pr mahaBaart @yaaoMÆ
      Ajit:     film kc bat par mahabharat kyõ?
      Suhas: ‘Black’ is my favourite movie.
      Akbar: How come?
      Suhas: (The) songs are very good; (the) plot and acting are great
                too.
      Akbar: I dislike Hindi films – (they are) only formula (films).
      Suhas: But this (one is) not a formula film. Its style is different.
      Akbar: All Hindi films are alike – a boy meets a girl, both fall in
                love, then a villain comes . . .
      (Suhas interrupts)
      Suhas: And both get married. No, this is not such a film.
      Akbar: Then it must be an imitation of the West.
      Suhas: (Do) you think only Western films are (generally)
                good? (lit. in your opinion only Western films are (generally)
                good)
      Akbar: I do not say this: the old Hindi films are good.
      (Ajit Singh listens patiently to this discussion and intervenes:)
      Ajit:     Why (wage a) fierce battle over the topic of films? (implying
                that the topic of films is not worthy of such
                a serious discussion)

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      ‘blaOk’      Black                  black
      mana–psand   man-pasand             favourite
      vah kOsao    vo ksse                how come?
      khanaI       kahanc (f.)            story
      Saanadar     shandar                splendid, great
      ibalkula     bilkul                 absolutely
      naapsand     pasand (f.)            like
      AaOr         aur                    and, more, other, else
      Andaj,a      andaz (m.)             style
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                  125


ek–saa      ek-sa              alike
naayak      nayak              hero
Klanaayak   khalnayak          villain
naaiyaka    nayika             heroine
Pyaar       pyar (m.)          love
SaadI       shadc (f.)         marriage
haonaa      hona (–ne)         to be/happen
haotI hOM   hotc hq            generally happen, generally take place (pl.)
haotI hO    hotc hs            generally happens, generally takes place (sg.)
haogaI      hogc               will be
eosaa       ssa                such
piScama     pashcim (m.)       West
piScamaI    pashcimc           Western
nakla       nakal (f.)         copy, fake, imitation
#,yaala     <xayal> (m.)       opinion, view
isaf-,      sirf               only
khnaa       <kshna> (+ne)      to say
puranaa     purana (adj. m.)   old (inanimate)
baat        bat (f.)           matter, conversation, topic
maha        maha               great
mahaBaart   mahabharat         one of the two greatest epics from Sanskrit;
                                  fierce battle (non-literal context)
@yaaoM      kyõ                why



Pronunciation
The Hindi word for ‘opinion’ can be pronounced and written in two
ways: K,yaala xayal and #,yaala xyal. The latter form is more frequent
among the educated; we will use this form here.
  The verb ‘to say’ is pronounced ksh but is written kh kah.


Notes
iflmaoM filmG
The English word ‘film’ has been assimilated into Hindi. It is no
longer treated as a foreign word in the language; therefore, it has
gender. From the plural ending eá g, you can predict its gender. It is,
of course, feminine. (It is treated as a feminine of the nerd category,
i.e. marked.)
126                                          Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      Negative markers: nahIM nahm, na na

      The short version of nahIM nahm ‘not’ is na na. It is written na na but in
      pronunciation the vowel a often becomes long, i.e. a.
        In polite orders na na is used instead of nahIM nahm. It is also used with
      subjunctives. Do not worry about subjunctives for now. However,
      observe the use of na na in polite orders (‘polite imperatives’).

         na      dIijae
         na dcjiye
         not please give
         Please do not give.

      It is also used with the word naapsand napasand ‘dislike’. However, with
      nouns it is not as productive as with polite commands. For example,
      you cannot make the word ‘dissatisfaction’ using na na with the Hindi
      equivalent of ‘satisfaction’.

      AaOr aur as an adjective or adverb
         [saka      Andaja,      AaOr          hO.
         iska       andaz        aur           hs.
         its        style        different     is

      The conjunction ‘and’ in Hindi expresses a range of meanings when
      used either as a predicate, as in the above sentence, or as an adject-
      ive, as below:

         AaOr      caaya dIijae.
         aur    cay dcjiye.
         more tea please give
         Please give me (some) more tea.

         AaOr      saaD,I     idKa[e.
         aur     saRc dikhaiye.
         other saree please show
         Please show (me some) other saree.

      AaOr aur is equivalent to the English ‘different’, ‘more’, ‘else.’ Observe
      another frequent expression with AaOr aur.
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                              127


   AaOr   kuC     caaiheÆ
   aur kuch cahiye?
   else some want
   Do you want something else?

Note the difference in word order.

ek-saa ek-sa: ‘same’, ‘alike’
   saba   ihndI   iflmaMo   ek   saI   haotI       hOM.
   sab Hindi filmg ek         sc     hotc          hq
   all Hindi films one -ish generic Be             are
   Generally all Hindi films are alike.

The saa -sa is like the English ‘-ish’ (e.g. ‘boyish’). So the Hindi sen-
tence in English is literally ‘Generally all Hindi films are one-ish.’

Generic haota haonaa ‘be’
The sentence above gives the generic meaning. There is no separate
word exactly equivalent to the English ‘generally’ in the sentence.
It is the verb haotI hotc that contributes to this meaning. Compare
this sentence with the following:

   saba   ihndI   iflmaMo   ek   saI   hOM.
   sab Hindi filmg ek         sc       hq
   all Hindi films one -ish            are
   All Hindi films are alike.

which expresses the universal truth, i.e. without exception, Hindi
films are alike.
   Note the slight difference in the two conjugations of haonaa hona
‘to be’:

Generic                                                      Non-generic

ho + t      +c               hq                              hq
be + aspect + number, gender are

It is the generic conjugation which contains the English word ‘gen-
erally’ in Hindi. The verb agrees with the subject. Now observe the
two other examples of the generic Be in Hindi:
128                                                          Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


        daonaaMo   maoM         Pyaar            haota                hO.
        donõ mg pyar           hota         hs.
        both in love (m.) generic Be is
        Generally, love blossoms (lit. happens) between the two.

        daonaaoM   kI SaadI                          haotI                  hO.
        donõ kc shadc             hotc          hs
        both of marriage (f.) generic Be is
        Generally, their marriage (lit. the marriage of both) takes place.

      haota hota agrees with Pyaar pyar ‘love’, which is masculine singular in
      Hindi, whereas haotI hotc agrees with SaadI shadc ‘marriage.’ Similarly,
      hO hs agrees with its respective subjects.

      Direct object: kao ko or sao se
      In Hindi the English expression ‘boy meets girl’ is

        laD,ka            laD,kI        sao      imalata hO.
        laRka laRkc se        milta hs
        boy    girl    with meet is
        The boy meets the girl.

        laD,ka            laD,kI        kao       doKta         hO.
        laRka laRkc ko                            dekhta       hs
        boy    girl    object                     see          is
        The boy sees the girl.

      Notice that the English animate object ‘girl’ is followed by a
      postposition, either sao se or kao ko. Usually, the most frequent object
      postposition is kao ko. Only some verbs, such as ‘meet’ and the verbs
      of communication (e.g. ask, say, speak, even love), are exceptions –
      they take sao se instead of kao ko.
         Remember that only animate objects take kao ko. Inanimate
      objects do not take any object marker.

        laD,ka            Gar            doKta     hO.
        laRka ghar      dekhta                     hs
        boy    house see                           is
        The boy sees a house.

      The object Gar ghar ‘house’ is not marked with kao ko because it is an
      inanimate noun. More details are given in the discussion of articles
      in the Reference grammar section.
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                               129


Word-for-word translation
  piScama        kI nakla         haogaI.
  pashcim kc nakal hogc
  West      of copy be-will
  (The film) will be an imitation of the West.

The verb formation is as follows:

  ho +      g       +                        c
  be + future tense +                  number gender


‘Tell me why’ column
    savaala:          @yaa ihndustanaI laaoga khto hO:M ‘I love you’?
  1 saval:            kya hindustanc log kshte hq: ‘I love you’?
    Question:         Do Indians say: ‘I love you’?

  •   javaaba:       (a)    AaáKaoM saoÊ laoikna SabdaoM sao nahIM .
                     (b)    isaf,- SabdaoM sao.
      javab:         (a)    kkhõ se, lekin shabdõ se nahm.
                     (b)    sirf shabdõ se.
      Answer:        (a)    By eyes, but not in words.
                     (b)    Only by words.

  Circle the correct answer.

      zIk javaaba:          (a)
      Thck javab:           (a)
      Correct answer: (a) AaáKaoM saoÊ laoikna SabdaoM sao nahIM .
                      (a) kkhõ se, lekin shabdõ se nahm


    savaala:          ihndustanaI SabdaoM sao kBaI khto hO:M ‘I love you’?
  2 saval:            hindustanc shabdõ se kabhc kshte hq: ‘I love you’?
    Question:         Do Indians ever say: ‘I love you’?

  •   javaaba:        (a)   kBaI nahIM
                      (b)   kBaI kBaI.
      javab:          (a)   kabhc nahm
                      (b)   kabhc kabhc
      Answer:         (a)   Never
                      (b)   Sometimes
130                                            Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


         Circle the correct answer.

             zIk javaaba:         (b)
             Thck javab:          (b)
             Correct answer: (b)        kBaI kBaI. kabhc kabhc.

           savaala:         ihndustanaI SabdaoM sao kOsao khto hOM ‘I love you.’?
         3 saval:           hindustanc shabdõ se ksse kshte hq ‘I love you.’
           Question:        How do Indians say in words: ‘I love you’?
         •    javaaba:      (a)   maOM tuma sao Pyaar krta hUá.
                            (b)   mauJa kao tuma sao Pyaar hO.
              javab:        (a)   mq tum se pyar karta ho.
                            (b)   mujhko tum se pyar hs.
              Answer:       (a)   I love you.
                            (b)   Love with you is to me.
         Circle the correct answer.

             zIk javaaba:         (b)
             Thck javab:          (b)
             Correct answer: (b)        mauJa kao tuma sao Pyaar hO. mujhko tum se pyar hs


      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      laaoga         log (m.)                   people
      AaáK           kkh (f.)                   eye
      AaáKaoM        kkhõ (f. oblique)          eyes
      sao            se                         from, with, by
      Sabd           shabda (m.)                word
      SabdaoM        shabdõ (m. oblique)        words
      isaf,-         sirf                       only
      kBaI           kabhc                      ever
      kBaI nahIM     kabhc nahm                 never
      kBaI–kBaI      kabhc kabhc                sometimes


      Note
      ‘I love you’ prohibition
      The name for ‘Cupid’ is kama dova kama Dev (‘the God Kama’). kama dova
      kama Dev carried bows and arrows exactly the same way as ‘Cupid’
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                            131


in the West. Did you notice the similarity between the two words –
‘Cupid’ and kama kama? Although kama kama has delighted Indians
since approximately 3000 BC, Indians do not like to express ‘I love
you’ in exactly the same way as in English. Some expressions are
better made non-verbally than verbally. Such is the preference of
Indians. If one has to say ‘I love you’ in words, it is better to express
it by means of experiential subject construction rather than using
the non-experiential deliberate subject. The following expression is
almost vulgar. (Although such expressions are now common in
Bollywood films. The language is changing!)

   maOM       tumasao                Pyaar           krta     hUá.
   mq         tumse                  pyar            karta    ho
   I          you-with               love            do       am

Therefore, the expression ‘I love you’ is best expressed in the follow-
ing words:

   mauJakao             tumasao              Pyaar      hO.
   mujhko               tum-se               pyar       hs.
   me-to                you with             love       is

However, nowadays among the educated and the younger genera-
tion the English expression ‘I love you’ is becoming quite popular.

Reduplication and pluralization

The reduplication of the adverb kBaI kabhc ‘ever’ gives the plural
meaning ‘sometimes’.

Oblique plural nouns
Remember peer pressure. Notice the influence of a postposition on
plural nouns.

                                  Masculine                          Feminine

Singular                          shabda      Sabd word              kkh    AaáK eye
Plural                            shabda      Sabd words             kkhg   AaáKoM eyes

Plural nouns yield to the pressure of postposition and take the
ending õ.
132                                                     Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


           shabdõ             se          SabdaoM sao   by words
           kkhõ               se          AaáKaoM sao   by eyes


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                                      (CD 1; 36)

      naaSto maoM Aap @yaa Kato hOMÆ nAshte mG Ap kyA khAte
      hQ? What do you eat for breakfast?
      Rakesh Seth visits his doctor and complains about his stomach prob-
      lems. Apparently, he suffers from gas. The doctor begins by inquiring
      about his eating habits.

      Da^@Tr:            rakoSa jaIÊ naaSto maoM Aap @yaa Kato hOMÆ
      Doctor:            Rakesh jc, nashte mg ap kya khate hq?
      rakoSa:            dsa samaaosao.
      Rakesh:            das samose.
      Da@Tr:             AaOr, @yaa pIto hOMÆ
      Doctor:            aur, kya pcte hq?
      rakoSa:            mauJao caaya bahut AcCI lagatI hO. savaoro bahut caaya pIta hUá.
      Rakesh:            mujhe cay bahut acchc lagtc hs. savere bahut cay pcta ho.
      Da@Tr:             Aapkao SarIr kI ibamaarI nahIM. idmaaga kI ibamaarI hO [sailayao Aap iksaI
                         saaikeoiT/saT ko pasa jaa[yao.
      Doctor: apko sharcr kc bimarc nahm. dimag kc bimarc hs. is liye ap
              psychiatrist ke pas jaiye.

      Doctor:            Rakesh jC, what do you eat for breakfast?
      Rakesh:            Ten samosas.
      Doctor:            And, what (do you) drink?
      Rakesh:            I like tea a lot. (In the) morning (I) drink a lot of tea.
      Doctor:            You do not have (any) physical illness. (You) have a mental
                         illness. Therefore, you (should) go to the psychiatrist.

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      naaSta               nashta (m.)                  breakfast
      pInaa                pcna (+ne)                   to drink
      caaya                cay (f.)                     tea
      mauJaoÊ mauJakao     mujhe, mujhko                (to) me
      laganaa              lagna (+ko)                  to seem, to be applied
      AcCa laganaa         accha lagna (+ko)            to like
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                    133


savaora         savera (m.)           morning
SarIr           sharcr (m.)           body
ibamaarI        bimarc (f.)           illness
idmaaga,        dimaG (m.)            brain
[sailae         isliye                therefore, so, thus, because of this



Notes
AcCa laganaa accha lagna ‘to like’
You have already learned expressions (with experiential subjects)
such as

    mauJakao   caaya psand      hO.
    mujhko cay         pasand   hs.
    me-to tea          liking   is
    I like tea.

Another common way of saying the same expression is

    mauJakao   caaya     AcCI    lagatI hO.
    mujhko cay           acchc lagtc hs.
    me-to tea (f.) good feel is
    I like tea. (lit. Tea feels good to me.)


‘Ghost’ postposition

The Hindi equivalents of ‘breakfast’ and ‘morning’ are naaSta nashta
and savaora savera respectively.
   If we attach the postposition mg ‘in’ to these nouns, the peer
pressure exerted by the postposition makes the nouns oblique.

Unmarked masculine nouns               Oblique singular (unmarked nouns)

naaSta nashtA breakfast                naaSto maMo nashte mg for (in) breakfast
savaora saverA morning                 savaoro maMo savere mg in the morning

However, the English expression of time ‘in the morning’ is savaoro
savere in Hindi. Although the effect of the Hindi postposition (peer
pressure) is quite apparent, the postposition maMo mg is dropped. The
134                                           Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      oblique form indicates its presence. Therefore, this is the ‘ghost’
      postposition.

      Word-formation: derived adjectives
      Do some detective work and see how English adjectives such as
      ‘silken’ are formed in Hindi:

      Nouns                                 Adjectives

      roSama       resham         silk      roSamaI        reshamc       silken
      saUt         set            cotton    saUtI          setc          cotton (as in cotton
                                                                            clothes)
      nakla nakal                 copy      naklaI nakalc                fake
      Asala asal                  fact      AsalaI asalc                 real, genuine
      ihndustana hindustan        India     ihndustanaI hindustanc       Indian
      banaarsa banaras            Banaras   banaarsaI banarasc           from Banaras (lit.
                                                                            Banarasian)

      If you think that the addition of c at the end of the word makes it an
      adjective, you are right. Note that all the nouns (and place names)
      given above end in a consonant. You cannot derive an adjective by
      adding c to the nouns ending in a vowel. For example, the expres-
      sions ‘from Delhi’ or ‘from Agra’ cannot be reduced to one-word
      adjectives by the addition of c. Only the postposition sao se can rescue
      these expressions.
         Now, observe how words such as ‘physical’ and ‘mental’ are
      formed in Hindi:

           SarIr      kI baImaarI                idmaaga      kI ibamaarI
           sharcr kc bimarc                      dimag kc bimarc
           body of illness (f.)                  brain of illness (f.)
           Physical/bodily illness               Mental illness

      The possessive construction is used instead. Is it possible to reduce
      SarIr kI sharcr kc and idmaaga kI dimag kc to the c- type adjectives? Yes,
      of course.

           SarIrI      baImaarI                  idmaagaI     ibamaarI
           sharcrc bimarc                        dimagc bimarc
           Physical/bodily illness               Mental illness

      Always remember, though, that word-formation can sometimes be
      quite tricky in languages.
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                                    135


Go to the doctor
You have observed that the English ‘to’ is usually kao ko in Hindi.
However, the English expression ‘go to the psychiatrist’ is

   saaikeoiT/saT            ko          pasa           jaa[yao.
   psychiatrist             ke          pas            jaiye
   Psychiatrist             of          near           please go

In other words, the English expression is phrased in Hindi as ‘Please
go near the psychiatrist.’ The compound postposition ko pasa ke pas
is used instead of kao ko. Similarly, the Hindi version of ‘Please go
to the doctor’ is

   Da@Tr           ko            pasa          jaa[yao.
   dakTar          ke            pas           jaiye

Contractive e pronoun forms
mauJao mujhe is the short form of mauJakao mujhko.

AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1
Choose any word from the following four columns and form at least
seven sentences. You can use a word from the columns as many
times as you like.

   mauJakao        pZ,nao                              ka          SaaOk   hO.
   mujhko          paRhne                              ka          shauk   hs
   Aapkao          gaanao                              psand               hOM.
   apko            gane                                pasand              hq
                   @yaa/kya
                   tOrnao/tsrne
                   Kanao/khane
                   @yaa–@yaa/kya–kya

Exercise 2
Read the following statements and then answer the question about
each statement. Your answer should be in Hindi.
136                                                 Unit 4: What are your hobbies?


      1 Statement: John is fond of dancing and singing. (Hint: dancing
                   = naacanaa nacna)
        Question: gaanao ko Alaavaa jaa^na kao @yaa psand hOÆ
                   gane ke alava John ko kya pasand hs?
        Answer:    ............

      2 Statement: Judy loves to write stories and poems? (Hint: poem
                   = kivata kavita (f.))
        Question: jaUDI kao @yaa @yaa SaaOk hOMÆ
                   Judy ko kya kya shauk hq?
        Answer:    ............

      3 Statement: Ramesh’s likes and dislikes are given below:


          Likes                                                      Dislikes

          samaaosaa Kanaa samosa khana                               icakna Kanaa cikan khana
          to eat samosa                                              to eat chicken
          XaakaharI Kanaa shakaharc khana                            maaásaaharI Kanaa mksaharc khana
          vegetarian food                                            non-vegetarian food
          khainayaaá kahaniyk                                        kivataeá kavitayg
          stories                                                    poems
          BaartIya saMgaIt bhartcya sargct                           dosaI saMgaIt desc sargct
          Indian music                                               Country music


          Question:         rmaoSa kao @yaa @yaa naapsand hO/ hOMÆ
                            Ramesh ko kya kya napasand hs/hq?
          Answer:

          Question:         rmaoSa kao @yaa @yaa psand hO/ hOMÆ
                            Ramesh ko kya kya pasand hs/hq?
          Answer:

      Exercise 3
      There are two possible interpretations of the following sentences.
      Uncover their ambiguity by translating them into English.

      1   jaa^na kao Kanaa psand hO.
          John ko khana pasand hs.
      2   jaa^na kao gaanaa psand hO.
          John ko gana pasand hs.
Unit 4: What are your hobbies?                                    137


Exercise 4

Write two things children do not like about their parents.

Exercise 5

How many ways can you find to say ‘I like swimming’ in Hindi?


Exercise 6            (CD 1; 38)

If you have the recording, circle the items which the speaker’s
daughter likes:

1   cats iballaI billc
2   dogs ku,,<aa kutta
3   spicy foods masaalaodar Kanaa masaledar khana
4   cricket (game) ik`koT krikeT
5   a classical Indian dance BartnaaT\yama\ bharatnaTyam
6   rock music ra^k myaUija,k rak myuzik
138                      Unit 5: What will you do during the break?




      5 Cui+yaaoM maoM @yaa kroMgaoÆ
        chuTTiyõ mg kya
        kargge?
            What will you do during the break?




       By the end of this unit you should be able to:
       •   talk about your own and others’ plans
       •   compare people and objects
       •   develop paraphrasing skills
       •   express desires (use desiratives)
       •   use the future tense
       •   use capabilitatives
       •   use progressive tense forms
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                            139


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                         (CD 2; 1)

maOM Baart jaanaa caahta háU. mQ bhArat jAnA cAhtA hO
I want to go to India
Suman Kumar is planning to spend his Christmas vacation in India.
He knows that December and January are excellent months to visit
India. Summers are hot and they are followed by monsoons. So he
goes to an ethnic travel agent in Toronto to make his travel plans.

ejaonT:    @yaa saovaa kr saktI háUÆ
Agent:     kya seva kar saktc ho?
saumana:   ihndustana ko ilayao iTkT caaihyao.
Suman:     hindustan ke liye TikaT (ticket) cahiye?
ejaonT:    isaf- Apnao ilayaoÆ
Agent:     sirf apne liye?
saumana:   pirvaar ko ilayao.
Suman:     parivar ke liye.
ejaonT:    iktnao laaoga hOMÆ
Agent:     kitne log hq?
saumana:   caar– dao baD,o AaOr dao baccao.
Suman:     car – do baRe aur do bacce.
ejaonT:    baccaaoM kI ]mar baarh sao kma hOÆ
Agent:     baccõ kc umar bara se kam hs?
saumana:   laD,kI kI ]mar baarh hO AaOr laD,ko kI Ch.
Suman:     laRkc kc umar bara hs aur laRke kc che.
ejaonT:    kba jaanaa caahto hOMÆ
Agent:     kab jana cahte hq?
saumana:   ik`samasa maoM.
Suman:     Christmas mg.
ejoanT:    pIk saIja,na hOÊ iTkT mahágaI haogaI.
Agent:     peak season hs TikaT (ticket) mshqgc hogc.
saumana:   kao[- baat nahIM.
Suman:     koc bat nahm.

Agent:     What can I do (for you) (lit. what service can I do)?
Suman:     I need a ticket for India.
Agent:     Only for yourself?
Suman:     For the family.
Agent:     How many people are (there in the family)?
Suman:     Four – two adults and two children.
140                                Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      Agent:           Is the age of the children less than twelve?
      Suman:           The girl is twelve and the boy (is) six.
      Agent:           When do (you) want to go?
      Suman:           During Christmas.
      Agent:           (It) is (the) peak season. The ticket will be expensive.
      Suman:           It does not matter (lit. none matter).

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      saovaa           seva (f.)                 service
      saknaa           sakna                     can, be able to
      Apnaa            apna                      one’s own
      pirvaar          parivar (m.)              family
      ]mar             <umar> (f.)               age
      sao              se                        than, from, by
      kma              kam                       less
      caahnaa          cahna (+ne)               to want
      maoM             mg                        in, during
      Cui+yaaoM maoM   chuTTiyõ mg               during break/vacation
      mahágaa          <mshqga> (m. adj.)        expensive
      kao[-            koc                       some, any, someone, anyone


      Pronunciation
      The word for ‘age’ is pronounced and written in two ways: ]mar umar
      and ]ma` umra.
        The Hindi word mshqga is written mahãga mahágaa.


      Notes
      saknaa sakna ‘can’
      The expression ‘What can I do (for you)’ is expressed as

            maOM            @yaa       saovaa        kr      saktI    hUáÆ
            mq              kya        seva          kar     saktc    ho?
            I (f. sg.)      what       service       do      can      am

      Notice the placement of saknaa sakna ‘can/to be able to’, which is like
      any other verb in Hindi. It is conjugated in different tenses.
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                      141


   Consider one more example.

   maOM              baaola       sakta       hUá .
   mq          bol sakta ho.
   I (m. sg.) talk can   am
   I can talk.

The form sakta hUá sakta ho agrees with the subject and the real verb
baaola bol ‘talk’ precedes sakta hUá sakta ho.

Apnaa apna ‘one’s own’
Apnaa apna is a possessive pronoun which means ‘one’s own’. The
English possessive pronouns can either be translated as regular
possessives or using the Apnaa apna form. Observe the distinction
Hindi makes in this regard.

   maora     naama            jaana     hO.
   mera nam     John                    hs
   my   name John                       is
   My name is John.

and

   maOM    Apnaa naama                ilaKta hUá.
   mq apna nam      likhta                       ho.
   I    own name write                           am
   I write my name.

In other words, the English phrase ‘my’ can be said in two ways in
Hindi: maora mera or Apnaa apna. The possessive pronoun does not show
any relationship to the subject of the sentence whereas Apnaa apna
shows this relationship. In the second sentence, the possessed thing
maora naama mera nam belongs to the subject of the sentence; therefore, maora
mera changes to Apnaa apna. In the first sentence, however, the sub-
ject naama nam is part of the possessed element. The rule-of-thumb is
that if in a simple clause you come across the following situation in
the same clause, the possessive pronoun becomes Apnaa apna.
142                        Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      Subject     Possessive          Possessive changes to

      maOM mq     maora mera          Apnaa apna
      hma ham     hmaara hamara       Apnaa apna
      tU te       tora tera           Apnaa apna
      tuma tum    tumhara tumhara     Apnaa apna
      Aap ap      Aapka apka          Apnaa apna
      vah vo      ]saka uska          Apnaa apna   (vah vo . . . ]saka uska must refer
                                                       to the same person)
      vao ve      ]naka unka          Apnaa apna   (vao ve . . . ]naka unka must have
                                                       the same referent)




      Prediction

      In Hindi maOM . . . maora mq . . . mera type combinations cannot be found
      in a simple sentence. In the third person, the vah . . . ]saka vo . . . uska
      (vao . . . ]naka ve . . . unka) combination cannot occur if the possessed
      thing and the possessor subject refer to the same person.

         vah Apnaa kama        krta    hO.
         vo apna kam karta hs
         he own job do            is
         He (John) does his (John’s) work.

      However, if in the English sentence ‘he’ refers to John and ‘his’
      refers to Bill, then Apnaa apna will not be used. When the subject
      possessor and the possessed thing are not identical, possessive pro-
      nouns will be used.

         vah ]saka kama        krta    hO.
         vo uska kam karta hs
         he his      job do         is
         He (i.e. John) does his (i.e. Bill’s) work.

      Apnaa apna is the masculine singular form. Its two other number gender
      variants are Apnao apne (m. pl.) and ApnaI apnc (f.). In Dialogue 1, in

         isaf-     Apnao       ilae
         sirf      apne        liye
         only      own         for
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                     143


the subject Aap ap is implied. Because of the following postposition,
Apnaa apna becomes oblique.

Comparative/Superlative sao se ‘than’

When learning Hindi, you do not need to memorize different forms
such as ‘good, better, best’. Only the sao se postposition is used with
the standard of comparison.

  baccaaoM          kI ]ma`              baarh         sao         kma   hO.
  baccõ     kc umar        bara     se    kam hs.
  children of age (f.) twelve than less is
  The children’s age is less than twelve.

The sao se is used after the standard/object of comparison, which is
‘twelve’. Also, the adjective follows the postposition. Similarly,

  jaa^na     rama           sao    AcCa          hO.
  John ram se          accha hs.
  John Ram than good is
  John is better than Ram.

Thus, the word of the comparative phrase ‘better than Ram’ is
reversed in Hindi, i.e. ‘Ram than good’.
   The superlative degree is expressed by choosing saba sab ‘all’ as the
object of comparison. The English sentence ‘John is best’ is ex-
pressed as ‘John is good than all’, as in

  jaa^na     saba     sao         AcCa       hO.
  John sab se                     accha      hs.
  John all than                   good       is
  John is the best.

Again notice the Hindi word order – all than good.
   The adjective can be further modified by words indicating degree,
such as j,yaada zyada ‘more’:

  jaa^na     rama           sao    j,yaada       AcCa        hO.
  John ram se          zyada accha hs.
  John Ram than more good is
  John is much better than Ram.
144                              Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      caahnaa cahna ‘to want’
      Note the word order of the English sentence ‘You want to go.’

         Aap     jaanaa     caahto      hOM.
         ap   jana cahte hq.
         you to go want are
         You want to go.

      The infinitive form ‘to go’ precedes the verb caahnaa cahna ‘to want’.
      The verb caahnaa cahna receives tense conjugation. Study one more
      example:

         vah     naacanaa        caahtI hO.
         vo nacna       cahtc hs.
         she to dance want is
         She wants to dance.


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                        (CD 2; 3)

      Baart ko baaro maoM saaocanaa bhArat ke bAre mG socnA
      Thinking about India
      On the same day Suman Kumar runs into his colleague Al Nasiri.
      They start talking about the Christmas break. Al catches him
      off-guard, lost in his own world. He attracts Suman’s attention by
      saying:

      Ala:         Ba[-Ê iksa duinayaa maoM haoÆ @yaa saaoca rho haoÆ
      Al:          bhac, kis duniya mg ho? kya soc rahe ho?
      saumana:     ihndustana ko baaro maoM saaoca rha qaa.
      Suman:       hindustan ke bare mg soc raha tha.
      Ala:         @yaaoMÊ saba zIk hO naÆ
      Al:          kyõ, sab Thck hs na?
      saumana:     haáÊ ik`samasa ba`ok maoM ihndustana jaa rho hOM.
      Suman:       hk, Christmas Break mg hindustan ja rahe hq.
      Ala:         Akolao yaa pirvaar ko saaqa.
      Al:          akele ya parivar ke sath?
      saumana:     baIbaI baccao yaanaI ik pUro kuTumba ko saaqa.
      Suman:       bcbc bacce yanc ki pere kutumba ke sath.
      Ala:         haá Baa[-Ê nahIM tao baIbaI tlaak ko ilayao khogaI. khaá jaaAaogaoÆ
      Al:          hk bhac, nahm to bcbc talak ke liye kahegc. kahk jaoge?
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                             145


saumana:        idllaIÊ Aagara AaOr jayapur.
Suman:          dillc, agra aur jaipur.
Ala:            AagaraÊ kOsao jaaAaogaoÆ
Al:             agra ksse jaoge?
saumana:        hvaa[- jahaj,a sao.
Suman:          havac jahaz se.
Ala:            hvaa[- jahaja, sao jaanaa baokar hO.
Al:             havac jahaz se jana bekar hs.
saumana:        @yaaoMÆ
Suman:          kyõ?
Ala:            hvaa[- jahaja, sao gaaD,I maoM kma samaya lagata hO.
Al:             havac jahaz se gaRc mg kam samaya lagta hs.

Al:    Well, in what world are you? What are you thinking?
Suman: I was thinking about India.
Al:    Why, everything is all right, isn’t it?
Suman: Yes (everything is fine); (we) are going to India during the
       Christmas break.
Al:    Alone or with the family?
Suman: Wife, children, that is, with the whole family.
Al:    Yes, brother; otherwise (your) wife will ask for a divorce.
       Where will (you) go?
Suman: Delhi, Agra and Jaipur.
Al:    How will (you) go to Agra?
Suman: By plane.
Al:    (It is) useless to go (to Agra) by plane.
Suman: Why?
Al:    (It) takes less time (to go to Agra) on the train than by
       plane.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
Ba[-            bhac                       hey, well (excl.)
iksa            kis                        which
duinayaa        duniya (f.)                world
saaocanaa       socna (+ne)                to think
ko baaro maoM   ke bare mg                 about, concerning
qaa             tha                        was
saba            sab                        all
Akolaa          akela (m. adj.)            alone
pirvaar         parivar (m.)               family
ko saaqa        ke sath                    with, together
146                        Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      baIbaI      bcbc (f.)        wife
      yaanaI      yanc             that is, in other words
      nahIM tao   nahm to          otherwise
      kuTumba     kutumba (m.)     family (archaic word; light-hearted humour)
      tlaak       talak (m.)       divorce
      hvaa        hava (f.)        air, wind
      jahaja,     jahaz (m.)       a ship, vessel, plane
      baokar      bekar            useless
      gaaD,I      gaRc (f.)        train, vehicle, cart
      samaya      samaya (m.)      time
      laganaa     lagna (–ne)      to take, to cost


      Notes
      Ba[- bhac ‘Hey’ vs Baa[- bhac ‘Brother’
      The short vs long vowel can make a considerable difference in mean-
      ing. The case in point is the contrast between Ba[- bhac and Baa[- bhac.
      The former is used as an exclamatory marker to express surprise,
      happiness, etc. The latter (Baa[- bhac) is a kinship term and you will
      recall that it means ‘brother’. However, in the Hindi-speaking
      community, it can be used as an address for a friend, stranger,
      shopkeeper, for both young and old. Sometimes, in very informal
      circumstances, it can even be used for women who are known to the
      speaker. Our advice is not to use it for women. In non-relationship
      situations, its main function is as an attention-getter while establish-
      ing a social relationship by using a kinship word for a person to
      whom one is not related. It therefore carries some sense of affection.
      The attention-getters such as sauinae suniye and kihe kahiye are neutral
      in terms of social relationship.
         The feminine counterpart of Baa[- bhac is bahna bshsn. The honorific
      particle jaI jc is used with bahna bshsn more frequently than with Baa[-
      bhac. Believe it or not, women are very much respected and cared
      about (sometimes more than men) in the very large segment of the
      South Asia Society! Of course, South Asia is not a perfect society.

      @yaa kya ‘what’, kaOna kaun ‘who’, and iksa kis
      ‘what, who’
      iksa kis is the oblique singular counterpart of both @yaa kya ‘what’
      and kaOna kaun ‘who’. (Remember the ‘peer pressure’ phenomenon.)
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                                    147


   @yaa duinayaa              kya duniya                      what world
   iksa duinayaa maoM         kis duniya mg                   in what world

For details see the Reference grammar section.

Compound postpositions
You have come across postpositions of one and two elements. Here
is the compound postposition consisting of three elements. Remem-
ber you will not find any compound postposition with ka ka.

   ko baaro maoM        ke bare mg                about, concerning (lit. in regard to)

Observe the use of this postposition.

   ihndustana ko baaro maMo         hindustan ke bare mg     about India
   khanaI ko baaro maoM             kahanc ke bare mg        about the story
   laD,kaoM ko baaro maoM           laRkõ ke bare mg         about the boys
                                    (laRkõ = boys, oblique plural)

Past tense: verb ‘to be’
The Hindi forms of English ‘was’ and ‘were’ are the following four:

                                               Masculine                      Feminine

Singular                                       qaa tha was                    qaI thc was
Plural                                         qao the were                   qaIM thm were

As in English, these forms agree with their subject. The only differ-
ence is that in Hindi they agree in gender in addition to number.

Progressives
So far you observed that Hindi either consists of one unit (e.g. polite
commands) or two units (the simple present). Now, you have an
opportunity to familiarize yourself with the verb which has three units.

   maOM     ihndustana         ko baaro maoM         saaoca      rha   qaa.
   mq hindustan ke bare mg                           soc   raha        tha.
   I    India      about                             think ing         was
   I was thinking about India.
148                              Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      The Hindi equivalent of English ‘was thinking’ is saaoca rha qaa soc raha
      tha. The Hindi verb is broken into three units: ‘verb stem’ (saaoca soc),
      ‘ing’ (rha raha), ‘was’ (qaa tha). The only difference between Hindi and
      English is that in Hindi ‘-ing’ is a separate word and the auxiliary
      ‘was’ ends the verbal string. Sentences such as the above are called
      either ‘past progressives’ or ‘past continuous’. We will call them past
      progressive.
         Like an adjective ending in a, raha has three variants: rha
      raha (masculine, singular), rho rahe (masculine, plural) and rhI rahc
      (feminine).
         In order to form the present progressive as in English the auxil-
      iary ‘was’ is replaced by present forms such as ‘am’, ‘is’, ‘are’. The
      same is true in Hindi. Just substitute the present ‘to be’ forms and
      you will get the present progressive verb form. For instance:

         maOM   ihndustana        ko baaro maoM   saaoca   rha   hUá.
         mq hindustan ke bare mg                  soc   raha     ho
         I    India      about                    think ing      am
         I am thinking about India.


      Future

      The English future tense consists of two verbal units, whereas in
      Hindi it is only one. You came across an example of a Hindi future
      tense in Unit 3:

         hma     ifr         imalaoMgao.
         ham phir     milgge
         we   again meet-will
         We will meet again.

         tuma    khaá        jaaAaogaoÆ
         tum kahk jaoge?
         you where go-will
         Where will you go?

      The Hindi verb forms can be broken up in the following manner.

         imala + eá             + ga            +e
         mil + g                +g              +e
         stem + person (Aap ap) + future ‘will’ + number-gender (m. pl.)
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                         149


   jaa  + Aao               + ga            +e
   ja   +o                  +g              +e
   stem + person (tuma tum) + future ‘will’ + number-gender (m. pl.)

   jaa  + }á               + ga            + [-
   ja   +o                 +g              +c
   stem + person ( maOM mq) + future ‘will’ + number-gender (f. sg./pl.)

The ghost postposition kao ko ‘to’ with locations
   Aap     ik`samasa       ba`ok       maoM   ihndustana   jaa        rho   hOM.
   ap   Christmas break mg hindustan ja         rahe hq.
   you Christmas Break in India            go   ing   are
   You are going to India during the Christmas break.

Although the postposition kao ko is dropped in Hindi, this is the
ghost postposition we referred to in the previous chapter. Recall the
discussion of the phrase ‘in the morning’ savaoro savere. If we place, say,
Apnaa apna ‘own’ before India, the ghost postposition will change it
to its oblique form – Apnao apne.


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                                 (CD 2; 5)

Aagara kI gaaD,I AgrA kC gARC The train to Agra
Al Nasiri and Suman Kumar continue to discuss the best ways of
getting to Agra. Finally, Al Nasiri convinces Suman Kumar to take a
train to Agra.

Ala:        Aagara ko ilayao saba sao AcCI gaaD,I taja eo@saPa`osa hO.
Al:         agra ke liye sab se acchc gaRc Taj Express hs.
saumana:    taja eo@saPa`osa khaá sao calatI hOÆ
Suman:      Taj Express kahk se caltc hs?
Ala:        nayaI idllaI saoÊ savaoro saat bajao.
Al:         nayc dillc se, savere sat baje.
saumana:    AaOr Aanao ko ilaeÆ
Suman:      aur ane ke liye?
Ala:        vahI gaaD,I Saama kao vaapsa AatI hO.
Al:         vahc gaRc sham ko vapas atc hs.
saumana:    laoikna hma laaoga rat kao tajamahla doKnaa caahto hOM.
Suman:      lekin ham log rat ko taj mshsl dekhna cahte hq.
150                               Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      Ala:           haáÊ taja rat kao AaOr BaI saundr lagata hO.
      Al:            hk, taj rat ko aur bhc sundar lagta hs.
      saumana:       tao ek rat Aagara àkoMgaoÊ Agalao idna idllaI laaOToMgao.
      Suman:         to ek rat agra rukgge, agle din dillc lauTgge.
      Ala:           caaádnaI ratÊ taja mahla AaOr baIbaI saaqa. . . . maja,a kIijayao.
      Al:            ckndnc rat, taj mshsl aur bcbc sath . . . maza kcjiye.

      Al:            The best train for Agra is the Taj Express.
      Suman:         Where does the Taj Express leave from?
      Al:            From New Delhi, (at) seven o’clock in the morning.
      Suman:         And to come (back)?
      Al:            The same train comes back (to New Delhi) in the evening.
      Suman:         But we people want to see the Taj Mahal at night.
      Al:            Yes, Taj looks even more beautiful at night.
      Suman:         Then, we will stay (for a) night (in) Agra; the next day
                     (we) will return to Delhi.
      Al:            The moonlit night, Taj Mahal and with (your) wife . . . (you)
                     enjoy (both).

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      nayaa             naya (m. adj.)              new
      saat bajao        sat baje                    seven o’clock
      Aanaa             ana (–ne)                   to come
      vah               vah <vo>                    that, he, she
      vahI              vahc (vah+hc)               same, that very
      Saama             sham (f.)                   evening
      vaapsa            vapas                       back
      vaapsa Aanaa      vapas ana (–ne)             to come back
      rat               rat (f.)                    night
      taja              taj (m.)                    crown
      mahla             mshsl (m.)                  palace
      tajamahla         taj mshsl                   the Taj Mahal
      AaOr BaI          aur bh c                    even more
      laganaa           lagna (+ko)                 to seem, to appear
      àknaa             rukna (–ne)                 to stop
      Agalaa            agla (adj.)                 next
      idna              din (m.)                    day
      laaOTnaa          lauTna (–ne)                to return, to come back
      caaád             ckd (m.)                    moon
      caaádnaI          ckdnc (f.)                  moonlit
      maja,a krnaa      maza karna (+ne)            to enjoy
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                   151


Pronunciation
mshsl is written as mahal mahla.


Notes
Time expressions

        savaoro       savere       in the morning
        daophr kao    dopshsr ko   at noon
        Saama kao     sham ko      in the evening
        rat kao       rat ko       at night

With the exception of savaoro savere, the kao ko postposition is uniformly
used with other time adverbs. savaoro savere takes the ghost postposition
kao ko.

Emphatic particle hI hc ‘only, right, very’

The particle of exclusion is hI hc ‘only.’ The English word ‘same’ is
equivalent to ‘that very’ in Hindi. It can be used with nouns, pro-
nouns and adverbs. It is usually used as a separate word except with
those pronouns and adverbs which end in -h. It undergoes contrac-
tion with -h ending pronouns and adverbs.



Pronouns                           Particle         Emphatic pronoun

vah                          +     hI         =     vahI
vo          he/she/that      +     hc         =     vahc that very, same
yah                          +     hI         =     yahI
ye          this             +     hc         =     yahc this very

Adverbs                            Particle         Emphatic adverb

vahaá                        +     hI         =     vahIM
vahk        there            +     hc         =     vahm right there
yahaá                        +     hI         =     yahIM
yahk here                    +     hc         =     yahm right here
152                               Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      Irregular commands
      Recall that polite commands are formed by adding -iye to a stem.
      The following four stems are irregular because they undergo a change
      with -iye.

      Stem                            Irregular       Polite command
                                      stem

      kr kar       do                 kIja kcj        kIijae kcj-iye    Please do
      do de        give               dIja dcj        dIijae dcj-iye    Please give
      lao le       take               laIja lcj       laIijae lcj-iye   Please take
      pI pc        drink              pIja pcj        pIijae pcj-iye    Please drink



                    paRhne ka abhyas 1
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 1    (CD 2; 7)

      ek laaok kqaaÁ hvaa[- iklao banaanaa
      ek lok kathA: havAC kile banAnA
      An ancient folk tale: ‘To build
      castles in the air’
      This is a folk story of a poor Brahmin from ancient times. He was a
      miser and used to save the flour that he got from his client in a ceramic
      pitcher. He used to guard the pitcher jealously and keep it next to his
      bed. One day he began to day-dream.

      1   ek idna doSa maoM Akala pD,ogaa.
          ek din desh mg akal paRega.
      2   maOM AaTa baocaUágaa.
        mq aTa becoga.
      3 AaOr kuC jaanavar K,rIdUágaa.
        aur kuch janvar xarcdoga.
      4 tao maOM AmaIr banaUágaa.
        to mq amcr banoga.
      5 ek idna maorI SaadI haogaI.
        ek din merc shadc hogc.
      6 ifr maora baccaa haogaa.
        phir mera bacca hoga.
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                   153


7   Aba maOM Aarama sao iktabaoM pZ,Uágaa.
    ab mq aram se kitabg paRhoga.
8   baccaa maoro pasa Aayaogaa.
    bacca mere pas ayega.

(At this point he continues to dream that he will ask his wife to take
away the child. Because she is busy she won’t be able to hear him; he
will therefore kick her. Thinking this, he actually kicks out and hits the
pitcher with his leg. The pitcher falls down and breaks. With this, the
castle he built in the air vanishes.)

1   One day (there) will be a famine in the country.
2   I will sell the flour.
3   And I will buy some animals.
4   Then I will become rich.
5   One day my marriage will occur. (lit. my marriage will take place)
6   Then I will have a child.
7   Now I will read books comfortably.
8   The child will come to me. (lit. come near me).

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
doSa               desh (m.)                 country
Akala pD,naa       akal paRna (–ne)          famine to occur
AaTa               aTa (m.)                  flour
baocanaa           becna (+ne)               to sell
kuC                kuch                      some
jaanavar           janvar (m.)               animal
K,rIdnaa           xarcdna (+ne)             to buy
AmaIr              amcr                      rich
bananaa            banna (–ne)               to become
Aarama             aram (m.)                 comfort
pZ,naa             paRhna (–ne)              to study, to read




    Web resources
        http://www.ncsu.edu/project/hindi_lessons/
    For the sights and sounds of Indian monuments, Units 2 and 9
    are particularly recommended
154                            Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      AByaasa abhyas Exercises
      Exercise 1
      You land at New Delhi airport and, on arrival at immigration, the
      officer asks you the following questions in Hindi. First, translate the
      questions into English in the space given next to the question, and
      then answer the questions in Hindi.
      Officer:     Aapka naamaÆ                                ________________
                   apka nam?
      You:         _________________
      Officer:     Aap Baart maoM iktnao idna rhMogaoÆ         ________________
                   ap bharat mg kitne din rahgge?
      You:         _________________
      Officer:     khaá–khaá jaayaMogaoÆ                       ________________
                   kahk-kahk jkepe?
      You:         _________________
      Officer:     ihndustana maoM pta @yaa hOÆ                ________________
                   hindustan mg pata kya hs?
      You:         _________________
      Officer:     vaapsa kba jaayaMogaoÆ                      ________________
                   vapas kab jagpe?
      You:         _________________
      Officer:     kao[- [llaIgala saamaana hOÆ                ________________
                   koc illegal saman hs?
      You:         _________________

      Exercise 2
      There are a few incorrect verbs in the following passage. Pick them
      out and replace them with the right verbs.
        maOM Aap ko ilae @yaa krnaa sakta hOÆ hma Aagara jaa caahta hO. Aagara iktnaI dUr
        hOMÆ bahut dUr nahIMÊ laoikna Aap kba jaa rha hOÆ hma kla jaayaogaa. gaaD,I saubah idllaI
        sao calato hO. Aap gaaD,I sao jaa caahta hOM.
        mq ap ke liye kya karna sakta hs? ham agra ja cahta hs. agra
        kitnc der hq? bahut der nahm, lekin ap kab ja raha hs? ham kal
        jaega. gaRc suba dillc se calte hs. ap gaRc se ja cahta hq?

      Exercise 3
      The sentences in the following letter are in the wrong order. Rear-
      range them in the right order.
Unit 5: What will you do during the break?                                                                 155


     iP`aya rakoSa
     tumhara imalaa Kt. pZ, kr KuSaI hu[-. tuma rho kba Aa haoÆ kla maOM iSakagaao hUá jaa
     rha. iSakagaao bahut Sahr hO baD,a . maOM iSakagaao sao hvaa[- jahaja, jaa}ágaa. laoikna maOM
     jaanaa caahta hvaa[- jahaja, sao nahIM hUá. gaaD,I mauJao psand hO sao jyaada hvaa[- jahaja,. baakI
     saba hO zIk.
                                                tumhara daostÊ
                                                    rajaIva
     Priya Rakesh:
     tumhara mila xat. paRh kar xushc huc. tum rahe kab a ho? kal mq
     Chicago ho ja raha. Chicago bahut shshsr hs baRa. mq Chicago
     se hawac jahaz (airplane) jaoga. lekin mq jana cahta hawac jahaz
     se nahm ho. gaRc mujhe pasand hs se zyada hawac jahaz. bakc sab
     hs Thck.
                               tumhara dost,
                                   Rajcv.

Exercise 4

Here are the answers. What were the questions? (Wherever needed,
the object of the inquiry is underlined.)

Q:      _________________
A:      maOM iSakagaao jaa rhI hUá.
        mq Chicago ja rahc ho.

Q:      _________________
A:      maOM yahaá saat idna rhUágaI.
        mq yahk sat din rahogc.

Q:      _________________
A:      maOM Apnaa kama kr rhI hUá.
        mq apna kam kar rahc ho.

Q:      _________________
A:      jaI haáÊ caaya bahut psand hO.
        jc hk, cay bahut pasand hs.

Q:      _________________
A:      maoro caar Baa[- hOM.
        mere car bhac hq.
156                                 Unit 5: What will you do during the break?


      Exercise 5
      If you won a million dollars, what would you do? Use the following
      words or phrases:

          king                                         become crazy with happiness
          queen                                        buy diamonds for my wife/girlfriend
          buy a yacht, Rolls Royce                     return to work
          travel around the world

      Exercise 6
      This fast-talking robot is programmed for the ‘me’ generation. Could
      you change his speech to suit the ‘we’ generation? Note the gender
      of ‘robot’ is masculine in Hindi.

          maOM raobaaT hUá. maMO kailaf,aoinayaa sao hUá. maO ihndI baaola sakta hUá. maOM ihndI samaJa BaI sakta
          hUá. maOM ihndI gaanao gaa sakta hUá, . maorI maOmaaorI bahut baD,I hO. maMO hr savaala pUC sakta
          hUá AaOr hr javaaba do sakta hUá. yaanaI hr kama kr sakta hUá. maMO hmaoSaa kama kr
          sakta hUá. maMO kBaI nahIM qakta hUá. maoro pasa hr savaala ka j,avaaba hO. laoikna masaalaodar
          Kanaa nahIM Ka sakta.
          mq robot ho. mq California se ho. mq hindc bol sakta ho. mq hindc
          samajh bhc sakta ho. mq hindc gane ga sakta ho. merc memory
          bahut baRc hs. mq har saval puch sakta ho aur har javab de sakta
          ho. yanc har kam kar sakta ho. mq hamesha kam kar sakta ho.
          mq kabhc nahm thakta ho. mere pas har saval ka javab hs. lekin
          masaledar khana nahm kha sakta.

      Exercise 7
      Listen to Mr Smith’s comments about a forthcoming visit to North
      America and then answer the following questions in Hindi:

      1   ima• ismaqa AmarIka kba jaayaoMgaoÆ
          Mr Smith America kab jagge?
      2   vao kaOna saI eyarlaa[na sao nyaU yaak- jaayaMogaoÆ
          ve kaun sc airline se New York jagge?
      3   @yaa vao Apnao pirvaar ko saaqa nyaU yaak- phuácaoMgaoÆ
          kya ve apne parivar ke sath New York pahjcgge?
      4   vao iDj,naI vaD- @yaaoM jaanaa caahto hOMÆ
          ve Disney World kyõ jana cahte hq?
      5   vao iDj,naI vaD- maoM iktnao idna rhMogaoÆ
          ve Disney World mg kitne din rahgge?
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                      157




6 kla @yaa ikyaaÆ
  kal kya kiya?
       What did you do yesterday?




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:
  •   talk about past events/actions
  •   use time adverbials with full clauses
  •   talk about topics dealing with ‘lost and found’
  •   learn to express sequential actions
  •   learn more about paraphrasing devices
  •   employ some more very common expressions
158                                            Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1     (CD 2; 9)

      @yaa baat h OÆ kyA bAt hS? What is the matter?
      Aditi ChatterjC is coming to America for graduate study. She lands at
      Kennedy Airport. As she is cleared through customs and is ready to
      take her flight to Chicago, she makes the horrifying discovery that her
      passport and traveller’s cheques have been stolen. She calls her family
      in Calcutta (now Kolkatta), reversing the charges. She gets in touch
      with her father, Suman ChatterjC, who is anxiously waiting for news of
      her arrival in the USA.
      saumana:   hOlaao.
      Suman:     hsllo.
      Aidit:     hOlaaoÊ DODÊ maOM Aidit baaola rhI háU.
      Aditi:     hsllo, DsD, mq Aditi bol rahc ho.
      saumana:   khaá sao baaola rhI haoÆ
      Suman:     kahk se bol rahc ho?
      Aidit:     nyaU yaa^k- sao.
      Aditi:     New York se.
      saumana:   @yaaoMÊ ABaI iSakagaao nahIM phuácaI.
      Suman:     kyõ, abhc Chicago nahm pahocc?
      Aidit:     nahIM.
      Aditi:     nahm.
      saumana:   @yaa baat hOÆ proSaana laga rhI hao. saba zIk–zak hO naÆ
      Suman:     kya bat hs? pareshan lag rahc ho. sab Thck-Thak hs na?
      Aidit:     maOM tao zIk hUá Ê laoikna maora pasapaoT-Ê maoro pOsao AaOr ( TO/valarj,a) caO@sa gauma hao gayao.
      Aditi:     mq to Thck ho, lekin mera passport, mere psse aur Trsvlars
                 (traveller’s) cheques gum ho gaye.
      saumana:   @yaaÑ
      Suman:     kya!
      Aidit:     iksaI nao maorI jaoba kaTI – eosaa lagata hO.
      Aditi:     kisc ne merc jeb kaTc – ssa lagta hs.
      saumana:   sacaÑ
      Suman:     sac!
      Aidit:     haá.
      Aditi:     hk.
      Aditi:     Hello, Dad, this is Aditi calling. (lit. I am Aditi speaking)
      Suman:     Where are you calling from?
      Aditi:     From New York.
      Suman:     Hey, haven’t you reached Chicago yet? (lit. why, you did
                 not reach Chicago yet?)
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                              159


Aditi:          No.
Suman:          What is the matter? (You) seem to be upset. Everything is
                fine, isn’t it?
Aditi:          As regards me, I am fine, but my passport, money and
                traveller’s cheques are lost.
Suman:          What! (lit. What! I do not believe it!)
Aditi:          Someone picked my pocket – it seems.
Suman:          Is that right! (lit. Truth!)
Aditi:          Yes.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
hOlaao             hsllo                  hello
ABaI               abh c                  right now
phuácanaa          pahjcna (–ne)          to reach, arrive
baat               bat (f.)               matter
@yaa baat hOÆ      kya bat hs?            what is the matter?
proSaana           pareshan (adj.)        troubled
saba               sab                    all
zIk–zak            Th ck-Thak             fine, hale and hearty
tao                to (particle)          then, as regards
gaumanaa           gumna (–ne)            to be lost
gae/gayao          gaye (m. pl)           went
@yaa               kya!                   what! I do not believe it!
iksaI              kisc                   someone
nao                ne                     agent marker in the past tense
jaoba              jeb (f.)               pocket
kaTnaa             kaTna (+ne)            to cut
jaoba kaTnaa       jeb kaTna              to pickpocket
eosaa              ssa                    such, it
saca               sac!                   Truth! It can’t be true!


Notes
The perfective form (the simple past)
We introduced the simple past tense forms of the verb ‘to be’.
Now, note the Hindi equivalent of the English ‘Didn’t (you) reach
Chicago?’:

   tuma           ABaI               iSakagaao      nahIM    phuácaIMÆ
   (tum)          abh c              Chicago        nahm     pahjcm?
   you            right now          Chicago        not      reached (f. pl.)
160                                  Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      Although the Hindi verb phuácaIM pahjcm is translated as ‘reached’, it has
      no intrinsic tense reference like words such as hO hs ‘is’ and qaa tha
      ‘was’. It simply shows that the action or situation is completed. The
      act may be completed in the present, past or future tense. Usually
      adverbs such as ‘yesterday’ and ‘tomorrow’ and the form of the verb
      ‘to be’ provide the tense information.
         Now recall the suffixes given in Magic Key 1 and do some detect-
      ive work regarding the feminine forms.


      Verb stem                                  Perfective form

      phuáca pahjc reach                         phuácaa pahjca    masculine singular
                                                 phuácao pahjce    masculine plural
                                                 phuácaI pahjcc    feminine singular
                                                 phuácaIM pahjcm   feminine plural


      Yes, for the first time feminine plural forms compete with masculine
      forms and have their own distinct plural identity. The Hindi pro-
      noun tuma tum always takes the plural form.
         Now note another perfective form from the above dialogue:

         iksaInao           maorI   jaoba         kaTI.
         kisc-ne        merc jeb            kaTc
         someone-agent my    pocket (f.) cut (f. sg.)
         Someone picked my pocket. (lit. someone cut my pocket)

      You will notice two things different that are from the previous
      sentence: (1) the use of the postposition nao ne, and (2) the verb agree-
      ment. The postposition nao ne occurs with those subjects that have
      transitive verbs in the perfective form. Notice verbs such as ‘come’,
      ‘go’, and ‘reach’ are intransitive, whereas verbs such as ‘cut’, ‘write’,
      ‘do’, and ‘buy’ are transitive. The Hindi word for the English ‘some-
      one’ is kao[- koc. Because of the postposition nao ne, the subject pronoun
      kao[- koc becomes iksaI kisc. In other words, peer pressure makes it
      oblique. Also, remember that the verb does not agree with those
      subjects followed by a postposition. Therefore, the verb does not
      agree with the subject; instead it agrees with the object jaoba jeb ‘pocket’,
      which is feminine singular in Hindi. For details about perfective
      forms see the Reference grammar section.
          Because the perfectives mark a situation or action as completed,
      they are usually associated with the past tense.
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                             161


gayaa ‘Went’ – an exception in verb form
The English verb ‘to go’ is an exception in the past tense form –
‘went’ rather than ‘goed’. Similarly, it is also irregular in Hindi in
the perfective form. Here are the Hindi equivalents of the English
verb form ‘went’:

Verb stem                               Perfective form

jaa ja go                               gayaa gaya           went       (masculine singular)
                                        gayao/gae gaye       went       (masculine plural)
                                        gayaI/ga[- gayc      went       (feminine singular)
                                        gayaIM/ga[- M gaym   went       (feminine plural)


Because Hindi and English belong to the same language family,
what is remarkable is that the English ‘g’ of the verb stem ‘go’ shows
up in the Hindi irregular form and then takes the Hindi perfective
suffixes. The sound ‘y’ intervenes in the two vowels which is quite
common, occurring in many languages.
    The other three important verbs that are irregular in the past
tense are the following: laonaa lena ‘to take’, donaa dena ‘to give’ and
pInaa pcna ‘to drink’.

Stem                Masculine                                          Feminine
                    Singular             Plural                        Singular      Plural

lao le take         ilayaa liya          ilayao/ilae liye              laI lc        laIM lm
do de give          idyaa diya           idyao/ide diye                dI dc         dIM dm
pI pc drink         ipyaa piya           ipyao/ipe piye                pI pc         pIM pm


Compound verbs: word-for-word translation

   maoro    pOsao    AaOr T/Ovalarj,a            caO@sa        gauma        gayao.
   mere psse   aur traveller’s cheques gum gaye.
   my   money and traveller’s cheques lost went
   My money and traveller’s cheques (are) lost.

Notice the clustering of the two verbs gauma gum ‘be lost’ and gayao gaye
‘went’ (m. pl.). This clustering of the real verbs is a special property
of Hindi and other South Asian languages. They are called ‘com-
pound verbs’. We will deal with this class of verbs later on in this
162                                        Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      book. For the time being note this verb clustering and memorize the
      sentence given above.

      Echo-words
      You have already come across the word zIk Th ck ‘fine, correct’. In the
      phrase zIk–zak Th ck Thak, the second word zak Thak does not have any
      meaning of its own. It just echoes the first word by making a slight
      vowel change. The meaning added by the echo word is ‘etc.’, ‘and all
      that’ or ‘other related things/properties’. Therefore, zIk–zak Th ck
      Thak means ‘fine, etc.’. Very often the first consonant sound is changed
      in Hindi echo words, e.g. kama-vaama kam vam ‘work, etc.’, naama-vaama nam
      vam ‘name etc.’. The preferred consonant change is by means of va v.


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                 (CD 2; 11)

      maora pasapaoT- gauma gayaa hO merA pAsporT gum gayA hS
      My passport is lost
      Aditi Chatterjii continues to talk with her father, Suman Chatterjii
      about the incident. She informs her father that she filed a report at the
      airport and that American Express will issue her new traveller’s cheques
      but not without her passport. So, she needs some money by telegram,
      and in the meanwhile she needs to go to the Indian Consulate Office in
      New York. At the consulate, she talks with an officer.
      Aidit:      maora pasapaoT- gauma gayaa hO. nayaa pasapaoT- caaihyao.
      Aditi:      mera pasporT ( passport) gum gaya hs. naya pasporT
                  ( passport) cahiye.
      Af,sar:     kba gaumaaÆ
      Officer:    kab guma?
      Aidit:      AajaÊ krIba paáca GaMTo phlao.
      Aditi:      aj, karcb pkc ghanTe pshle.
      Af,sar:     Aapkao maalaUma hO ik khaá gaumaaÆ
      Officer:    apko malem hs ki kahk guma?
      Aidit:      jaI haáÊ kOnaODI hvaa[- AD\Do maoM.
      Aditi:      jc hk, Kennedy havac aDDe mg.
      Af,sar:     kOsaoÆ
      Officer:    ksse?
      Aidit:      jaba [immaga`oSana sao baahr Aa[-Ê tao maoro pasa qaa. ifrÊ iSakagaao kI F,laa[T ko
                  ilayao dUsaro Tima-nala gayaIÊ tba BaI qaa. jaba ka]nTr pr phuácaIÊ tao doKaÊ
                  pasapaoT-Ê iTkTÊ pOsaoÊ AaOr TO/valarj,a caO@sa psa- maoM nahIM qao.
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                               163


Aditi:     jab immigration se bahar ayc, to mere pas tha. phir, Chicago
           kc flight ke liye desre Tarminal (terminal) gayc, tab
           bhc tha. jab kaunTar (counter) par pahjcc, to dekha,
           pasporT, ticket, psse, aur traveller’s cheques purse mg
           nahm the.
Af,sar:    puilasa maoM irpaoT- kI.
Officer:   police mg riporT (report) kc ?
Aidit:     jaI haáÊ yao doiKe.
Aditi:     jc hk, ye dekhiye.
Af,sar:    AcCa yao fama- BairyaoÊ ek–dao mahInao maoM nayaa pasapaoT- Aapkao imala jaayaogaa.
Officer:   accha ye form bhariye, ek-do mahcne mg naya pasporT
           apko milega.
Aidit:     [sasao jaldI nahIM imala saktaÆ
Aditi:     isse jaldc nahm mil sakta?
Af,sar:    jaI nahIMÊ phlao irpaoT- ihndustana jaayaogaI AaOr i@layarOnsa ko baad hI pasapaoT-
           imala sakta hO.
Officer:   jc nahm, pshsle report hindustan jayegc aur clearance ke
           bad hc pasporT mil sakta hs.
Aidit:     Sauik`yaa.
Aditi:     shukriya
Af,sar:    kao[- baat nahIM.
Officer:   koc bat nahm.

Aditi:     My passport is lost? (I) need a new passport.
Officer:   When was (it) lost?
Aditi:     About five hours ago today.
Officer:   Do you know where (it) was lost?
Aditi:     Yes, at Kennedy Airport.
Officer:   How?
Aditi:     When I came out of Immigration, I had (it). (lit. then (it)
           was near me) Then (I) went to the other terminal for the
           flight to Chicago; even then I had (it).
           When I reached the counter, then (I) noticed the passport,
           ticket, money and the traveller’s cheques were not in (my)
           handbag.
Officer:   (Did you) report (this) to (lit. in) the police?
Aditi:     Yes, look at this (referring to the police report).
Officer:   Okay. Fill out this form. In one or two months you will get
           a new passport.
Aditi:     Can’t (I) get (it) earlier than that?
Officer:   No, first the report will go to India and only after clearance
           (you) can get (it).
164                                      Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      Aditi:            Thanks.
      Officer:          You are welcome (or do not mention it).

      SabdavalaI        shabdavalc       Vocabulary
      nayaa              naya (m. adj.)           new
      krIba              karcb                    about, approximately
      GaMTa              ghanTa (m.)              hour
      phlaa              pshsla (m. adj.)         first
      phlao              pshsle                   (at) first, ago, previously
      maalaUma haonaa    malem hona (+ko)         to know, to be known
      hvaa[- AD\Da       havac aDDa (m.)          airport
      jaoba              jab (relative pronoun)   when
      baahr              bahar                    out, outside
      Aanaa              ana (–ne)                to come
      AayaI/Aa[-         ayc (f. sg.)             came
      dUsara             desra (m. adj.)          second, other, another
      tao                to                       then
      doKnaa             dekhna (+ne)             to see, to look at, to notice
      doiKyao/doiKe      dekhiye                  please see, look at, notice
      Barnaa             bharna (+ne)             to fill
      Bairyao/Baire      bhariye                  please fill, please fill out
      ek–dao             ek-do                    one or two
      mahInaa            mahcna                   month
      imalanaa           milna (–ne, +ko)         to meet, to get, to be available
      imalaogaa          milega (m. sg.)          will get
      jaldI              jaldc                    quickly
      ko baad            (ke) bad                 after, later
      Sauik`yaa          shukriya                 thanks


      Pronunciation
      desre is written as desare dUsara. The vowel a is dropped in colloquial
      pronunciation (see Script Unit 4).


      Notes
      maalaUma haonaa malem hona vs jaananaa janna ‘to know’
      Consider the word-for-word translation of the Hindi equivalent of
      the English expression ‘Do you know . . . ?’ in our dialogue.
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                            165


   Aapkao        maalaUma    hOÆ
   apko   malem hs?
   you-to known is
   Do you know . . . ?
The Hindi sentence is similar to the English ‘Is it known to you . . . ?’
The only difference is that in Hindi Aapkao apko is still the subject
but the non-volitional subject. Remember the discussion of dative/
experiential subjects in Unit 3: in Hindi there is a distinction be-
tween non-volitional and volitional verbs. The verb maalaUma haonaa malem
hona suggests the type of knowing or knowledge which is non-
volitional or unintentional in nature. The verb jaananaa janna can also
be translated as ‘to know’ but the difference is that jaananaa janna refers
to an act of knowing that is volitional and where some effort or
research has gone into that knowledge. As I pointed out earlier, the
volitional verbs do not take dative kao ko marking with their subjects.
Observe the following volitional counterpart of maalaUma haonaa malem hona.
   Aap             jaanatI   hOMÆ
   ap       jantc   hq . . . ?
   you (f.) know are
   Do you know . . . ?

Notice that the verb agrees with the subject Aap ap which is feminine
in our dialogue. In the former sentence Aapkao apko is the subject and
the verb does not agree with it. We will detail the question of agree-
ment again in this chapter. In the former sentence the verb agrees
with the implied object yah ye ‘this’, which is masculine singular, and
that is why the verb takes the singular form hO hs.
   Similarly, you have already come across two different usages of
the verb imalanaa milna ‘to meet’ and imalanaa milna ‘to get, to obtain.’

   hma      imalaoMgaoo.
   ham milqge
   we   meet-will
   We will meet.
The understood subject in the Hindi expression of the English ‘you
will get the passport’ is supplied below:

   Aapkao        pasapaoT-      imalaogaa.
   apko    passport milega
   you-to passport get-will
   You will get the passport.
166                                                      Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      English verbs such as ‘to get’ or ‘to obtain’ are treated as uninten-
      tional acts in Hindi and many other South Asian languages. That
      explains why the Hindi subject is followed by the postposition kao
      ko. Can you predict the element which the verb imalaogaa milega agrees
      with? No more suspense: it agrees with the object passport which is
      masculine singular in Hindi.

      The nao ne construction
      If we fill in the understood subjects in the following two expressions
      from the above dialogue –

        tao                 doKa.
        to                  dekha
        then                saw

      and

        puilasa              kao         irpaoT-               kIÆ
        police               ko          reporT                kc?
        police               to          report                did

      the complete sentences will be

        tao       maOMnao            doKa.
        to    mqne                   dekha
        then I-agent                 saw
        Then I saw.

      and

        Aapnao                 puilasa       kao         irpaoT-           kIÆ
        apne       police ko reporT     kc?
        you agent police to report (f.) did (f. sg.)
        Did you report to the police?

      The nao ne postposition is attached to the subject. Without the post-
      position the sentences would be ungrammatical. However, observe
      the following sentences:

        jaba        maOM                 [immaga`oSana               sao     baahr   Aa[-.
        jab   mq        immigration se                                       bahar   ayc.
        when I (f. sg.) immigration from                                     out     came (f. sg.)
        When I came out of immigration.
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                  167


and

   maOM       dUsaro   Tima-nala   gayaI.
   mq         desre Tarminal gayc.
   I (f. sg.) other terminal went (f. sg.)
   I went to the other terminal.

The above two sentences do not require the nao ne postposition. But
why not? The difference is that verbs such as ‘come’ and ‘go’ are
intransitive. The nao ne postposition is restricted to the transitive verbs
in the perfective form. Verbs such as ‘to see’ and ‘to report’ are
transitive and are used in the perfective form; so the postposition
nao ne with the subject is required. This type of construction is called
‘the ergative’ construction in linguistic literature. Many languages of
the world, such as Basque and some Australian Aboriginal languages,
have this property.
     The pronominal forms with the nao ne postposition are as follows:

Nominative pronouns                          The nao ne pronouns

maOM mq                                      maOMnao mqne       I
hma ham                                      hmanao hamne       we
tU te                                        tUnao tene         you (singular)
tuma tum                                     tumanao tumne      you (plural)
Aap ap                                       Aapnao apne        you (honorific)
vah vo                                       ]sanao usne        she, he, it, that
vao ve                                       ]nhaoMnao unhõne   they, those
yah ye                                       [sanao isne        this
yao ye                                       [nhaoMnao inhõne   these


Note that the third person pronouns show peer group pressure as a
result of nao ne. If you are learning the script, it is written as one word
with the third person plural pronoun.
   The nao ne forms of the question pronoun are: iksanao kisne ‘who’
(singular) and iknhaoMnao kinhõne ‘who’ (plural).

Complex verbs
As in English, in Hindi a noun can be turned into a verb. The only
difference is that the noun has to be anchored in verbs such as krnaa
karna ‘to do’ and haonaa hona ‘to be’. This is a very productive process
which allows Hindi to take nouns from languages such as Sanskrit
and Persian and turn them into verbs. English has not been spared
168                                            Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      either. So you can take English nouns such as the following and turn
      them into verbs:

      English noun        Hindi verb           Complex verb

      report              karna krnaa          irpaoT- krnaa report         karna ‘to report’
      telephone           karna krnaa          TolaIfaona krnaa telephone   karna ‘to telephone’
      pay                 karna krnaa          po krnaa         pay         karna ‘to pay’
      complain            karna krnaa          kmplaona krnaa complain      karna ‘to complain’

      As a matter of fact, even English adjectives and verbs can be used to
      generate Hindi complex verbs:

      English                             Hindi verb               Complex verb
      adjective/verb

      better                              hona haonaa              better hona ‘to recover’
      choose                              karna krnaa              choose karna ‘to choose’

      This construction can be extremely useful in those situations where
      one fails to recall the Hindi verb. For example, if you fail to recall
      the Hindi verb pZ,naa paRhna ‘to read/study’, do not give up the idea:
      you can custom-make the verb study karna from the English word
      ‘study’. We will nickname Hindi anchor verbs such as karna and
      hona ‘transformer’.

      The omission of ‘to’
      We pointed out earlier the use of the preposition in English in
      expressions such as ‘I went to the other terminal.’ In Hindi no
      postposition is used with the target; therefore, it is not appropriate
      to substitute Hindi kao ko for English ‘to’.

      Approximation by compounding
         ek–dao        mahInao          maMo
         ek-do     mahcne mg
         one-two month in
         In one or two months.

         dao–ek mahInao          maMo
         do-ek mahcne            mg
         is also fine.
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                                169


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                                        (CD 2; 13)

jyaaoitYaI ko pasa jaanaa jyotishi ke pAs jAnA
Visiting an astrologer
John Kearney has visited India several times and he loves Indian
philosophy. The concept of reincarnation fascinates him, and therefore
he never misses a chance to visit an astrologer or a fortune-teller. An
international fair is being held in London. John visits the Indian pavilion
and there he finds an astrologer and palmist. He shows the palmist his
hand in order to learn about his past. The palmist looks at his hand
and makes some general remarks about him, and finally asks about the
purpose of John’s visit.

jaa^na       maOM Apnao BaUt ko baaro maoM jaananaa caahta háU.
John:        ms apne bhet ke bare mg janna cahta ho.
jyaaoitYaI   Apnao f,irSto ko baaro maoM pUiCyaoÊ BaUt ko baaro maoM @yaaoM Æ
Palmist: apane farishte ke bare mg pechiye, bhet ke bare mg kyõ?
jaa^na       maora matlaba hO ik ipClao janma ko baaro maoM.
John:        mera matlab hs ki pichle janma ke bare mg.
jyaaoitYaI   p~o ko ibanaa mauiSkla hO.
Palmist: patre ke bina mushkil hs.
jaa^na       tao maoro bacapna ko baaro maoM bata[yao.
John:        to mere bacpan ke bare mg bataiye.
jyaaoitYaI   yao laa[naoM batatI hMO ik Aapka bacapna bahut AcCa qaa . . . saundr pirvaar . . .
             baD,a Gar . . . yao zIk hOÆ
Palmist: ye laing batatc hq ki apka bacpan bahut accha tha
         . . . sundar parivar . . . baRa ghar . . . ye Thck hs?
jaa^na   jaI haáÊ . . . laoikna. . . .
John:    jc hk, . . . lekin . . .
jyaaoitYaI   laoikna ipClao paáca saala AcCo nahIM qao.
Palmist: lekin pichle pkc sal acche nahm the.
jaa^na       ipta jaI ko marnao ko baad pirvaar pr bahut mauiSklaoM Aa[- M.
John:        pita jc ke marne ke bad parivar par bahut mushkilg aym.
jyaaoitYaI   yah baD,o Af,saaosa kI baat hO.
Palmist: ye baRe afsos kc bat hs.

John:        I want to know about my past/ghost.*
Palmist:     Please ask about your angels; why ask about (your) ghost?
John:        I mean about my last birth.
Palmist:     It is difficult (to tell) without the astrological chart.
170                                     Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      John:    Then, tell me about my childhood.
      Palmist: These lines (on your hand) tell me that your childhood was
               very good . . . beautiful family . . . a big house . . . is this
               right?
      John:    Yes, . . . but . . .
      Palmist: But (your) last five years were not good.
      John:    After the death of (my) father, (our) family faced a lot of
               difficulties. (lit. very many difficulties came on the family)
      Palmist: I am sorry (to hear) this. (lit. this is a matter of great
               sorrow)

      (*The word bhet is ambiguous. The palmist interprets it as ‘ghost’
      just for fun.)

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      BaUt              bhet (m.)        ghost, past
      f,irXta           farishta (m.)    angel
      pUCnaa            pechna (–ne)     to ask
      pUiCyao/pUiCe     pechiye          please ask
      matlaba           matlab (m.)      meaning
      janma             janma (m.)       birth
      p~a               patra (m.)       astrological chart
      ko ibanaa         (ke) bina        without
      mauiXkla          mushkil (f.)     difficult, difficulty
      bacapna           bacpan (m.)      childhood
      batanaa           batana (+ne)     to tell
      bata[yao/bata[e   bataiye          please tell
      saala             sal (m.)         year
      marnaa            marna (–ne)      to die
      ko baad           (ke) bad         after
      Aanaa             ana (–ne)        to come
      Af,saaosa         afsos (m.)       sorrow


      Notes
      Very frequent expressions: word-for-word
      translation

      Consider how the following three very frequent English expressions
      are phrased in Hindi:
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                                         171


English                                           Hindi

1 I mean.                                         maora     matlaba        hO.
                                                  mera      matlab  hs
                                                  my        meaning is

2 I am glad to hear this.                         yao      KuSaI           kI baat                   hO.
                                                  ye    xushc       kc bat       hs.
                                                  this happiness of matter (f.) is
                                                  This is a matter of happiness.

3 I am sorry to hear this.                        yao      Af,saaosa    kI baat                hO.
                                                  ye    afsos    kc bat       hs.
                                                  this sorrow of matter (f.) is
                                                  This is a matter of sorrow.



laa[naoM laing ‘lines’
   AapkI        laa[naoM   batatI       hOM.
   apkc    laing batatc                 hq.
   you of lines tell                    are
   Your lines tell (me).

Note that the English word ‘line’ takes the feminine gender in Hindi.


AByaasa       abhyas              Exercises

Exercise 1

Rearrange the following words to make correct sentences in Hindi.

   maoro daostÊ vao qao AcCo iktnao idnaÑ maOM saaocaa nao vao rhoMgao idna hmaoSaa. vao bacapna idna ko
   qao. maOM qaa hmaoSaa Kolata AaOr naacata qaa hr saundr caIj,a qaI. hr qaa idna nayaa AaOr
   hr rat Andaj,a ka qaa. idna vao Aba nahIM rho.
   mere dost, ve the acche kitne din! mq soca ne ve rahgge din hamesha.
   ve bacpan din ke the. mq tha hamesha khelta aur nacta tha. har
   sundar ccz thc. har tha din naya aur har rat andaz ka tha. din ve ab
   nahm rahe.
172                                    Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      Exercise 2

      Underline the correct form of the subject and the verb in the following
      sentences. (Hint: the gender of the English word ‘report’ is feminine.):

      1 ( maOMnao/maMO) vahaá (gayao/gayaI).
        (mqne/mq) vahk (gaye/gayc).
      2 (vah/]sanao) mauJakao (batayaa/batayao).
        (vo/usne) mujhko (bataya/bataye).
      3 (hma/hmanao) Gar (Aayaa/Aayao).
        (ham/hamne) ghar (aya/aye).
      4 (tuma/tumanao) Gar dor sao (phuácao/phuácaa).
        (tum/tumne) ghar der se (pahjce/pahjca).
      5 (vao/vaonao /]nhaMonao) puilasa kao irpaoT- (kI/ikyaa/ikyao).
        (ve/vene/unhõne ) police ko reporT (kc/kiya/kiye).
      6 (Aap/Aapkao/Aapnao) yao iktaba kba (imalaa/imalao/imalaI).
        (ap/apko/apne) ye kitab kab (mila/mile/milc).

      Exercise 3

      Activity: asking about your family histories
         First talk about your family history making use of the cues to
      make questions. Use the same method to ask your friends or part-
      ners questions about their family.

          Examples:     pirvaar/khaá sao/Aa parivar ‘family’/kahk se/a ‘come’
                        Aapka pirvaar khaá sao AayaaÆ
                        apka parivar kahk se aya?

                        maata–ipta/janma/hao mata-pita ‘mother-father’/janma
                        ‘birth’/ho ‘be, happen’
                        Aapko maata–ipta ka janma khaá huAaÆ
                        ap ke mata- pita ka janma kahk hua?

      Hint: use the English word for ‘arranged marriage’.
      The verb ‘to be married’ = marriage to take place/happen.
      younger/older = small/big

      1   parents/where/ born                5 how old
      2   parents/when/ born                 6 arranged marriage /love marriage
      3   rich or poor                       7 mother younger than your father.
      4   marriage/when/happen
Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?                                                     173


Exercise 4

Make questions from the following statements. The object of an
inquiry is indicated by the underlined words in the statements:

    Examples:       SaadI ko baad maoro maata–ipta [MglaMOD gayao.
                    shadc ke bad mere mata-pita England gaye.

                    SaadI ko baad maoro maata–ipta khaá gayaoÆ
                    shadc ke bad mere mata-pita kahk gaye?

                    maora pirvaar dsa saala phlao yahaá Aayaa.
                    mera parivar das sal pshsle yahk aya

                    Aapka pirvaar iktnao saala phlao yahaá AayaaÆ
                    apka parivar kitne sal pshsle yahk aya?

1 kla jaa^na ka janma idna qaa.
  kal John ka janma din tha.
2 jaa^na kko pirvaar nao ek paTI- kI.
  John ke parivar ne ek party kc.
3 vaao paTI- Saama kao hu[-.
  vo party sham ko huc.
4 jaa^na kao paTI- ko baaro maMo maalaUma nahIM qaaÆ
  John ko party ke bare mg malem nahm tha?
5 yao sarP`aa[sa paTI- qaI.
  ye surprise party thc.
6 kla jaa^na ka janma idna qaa.
  kal John ka janma din tha.


Exercise 5: Pauranaa ja,maanaa
purana zamana ‘Old days’                                 (CD 2; 15)

Indians, like most of us, have nostalgic feelings about the past.
The past is good and glorious. But the present . . . If you have the
recording, listen to the passage. After the beep, answer each state-
ment either by saying saca sac (true) or JaUz jheTh (false).
   Circle true (saca sac) or false (JaUz jheTh) for each statement:

1   Aajakla laaoga lava maOirja krto hOM.                     sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
    aj-kal log love marrige karte hq.                         s (true)    jh (false)
174                                                 Unit 6: What did you do yesterday?


      2   puranao ja,maanao maMo AadmaI Gar maMo kama krto qao.   sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          purane zamane mg admc ghar mg                           s (true)    jh (false)
          kam karte the.
      3   Aaja–kla isaf- AadmaI TIvaI doKto hOM.                  sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          aj-kal sirf admc TV dekhte hq.                          s (true)    jh (false)
      4   Aaja–kla isaf- AadmaI Kanaa banaato hOM.                sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          aj-kal sirf admc khana banate hq.                       s (true)    jh (false)
      5   puranao ja,maanao maoM pirvaar AcCa qaa.                sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          purane zamane mg parivar accha tha.                     s (true)    jh (false)
      6   puranao ja,maanao maoM TIvaI nahIM qaa.                 sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          purane zamane mg TV nahm tha.                           s (true)    jh (false)
      7   AaOr Aaja–kla samaya nahIM hO.                          sa (saca)   JaU (JaUz)
          aur aj-kal samay nahm hs.                               s (true)    jh (false)

      Now write sentence corrections of the false statements.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                       175




7 @yaa Aap ihndI baaola sakto hOMÆ
  kya ap hindc bol
  sakte hq?
       Can you speak Hindi?




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   talk about your skills
  •   give advice
  •   use obligatives
  •   form purpose clauses
  •   observe compound verbs
  •   use emphatic and persuasive forms
176                                                        Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                                        (CD 2; 16)

      @yaa Aap ihndI baaola sakto hOM Æ kyA Ap hindC bol sakte
      hQ? Can you speak Hindi?
      Vijay Mishra lives in Vancouver, Canada and he takes a bus from the
      University of British Columbia to downtown Vancouver. The bus is
      not crowded. He puts his money into the fare box slot. The bus driver,
      who is a white blue-eyed Canadian, utters something and Vijay Mishra
      understands it as ‘downtown eh’, and he replies ‘yes’ and sits down. As
      he settles down, he thinks that what he heard was not English but
      Hindi. A bit puzzled, he does not want to rule out that what he actually
      heard was the Hindi language. In fact, the driver had asked, ‘down-
      town jAnA hS’. So Vijay Mishra asks:

      ivajaya:      maaf kIijayaoÊ Aapnao @yaa khaÆ
      Vijay:        maf kcjiye, apne kaya kaha?
      D/a[var:      maOMnao pUCa ik Da]naTa]na jaanaa hO.
      Driver:       mqne pecha ki downtown jana hs.
      ivajaya:      Aro Aap tao bahut AcCI ihndI baaola sakto hOM.
      Vijay:        are! ap to bahut acchc hindc bol sakte hq.
      D/a[var:      haáÊ qaaoDI,–qaaoD,I ihndI baaola laota hUá.
      Driver:       hk, thoRc thoRc hindc bol leta ho.
      ivajaya:      ihndI Aapnao khaá saIKIÆ
      Vijay:        hindc apne kahk sckh c?
      D/a[var:      dUsarI valD- vaar ko samaya maOM iba`iTSa AamaI- maoM saOinak qaa. ]sa samaya ihndustana
                    maoM saIKI.
      Driver: desrc World War ke samaya mq British Army mg ssnik
              tha. us samaya hindustan mg sckhc.
      ivajaya       ABaI BaI AcCI ihndI AatI hO.
      Vijay:   abhc bhc acchc hindc atc hs.
      D/a[var: kaf,I samaya sao yaaoga AaOr maODIToSana saIK rha hUá [sailayao ihndI nahIM BaUlaI.
      Driver: kafc samaya se yoga aur meditation sckh raha ho isliye
               hindc nahm bhelc.
      ivajaya       yao tao bahut AcCa hOÊ nahIM tao yahaá ihndustanaI BaI ihndI BaUla jaato hOM.
      Vijay:        ye to bahut accha hs nahm to yahk hindustanc bhc hindc bhel
                    jate hq.
      D/a[var:      yah baat tao saca hO.
      Driver: ye bat to sac hs.

      Vijay:  Excuse me, what did you say?
      Driver: I asked if you need to go downtown.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                            177


Vijay:  Hey, you can speak Hindi very well.
Driver: Yes, (I) can speak a little Hindi.
Vijay:  Where did you learn Hindi?
Driver: At the time of World War II, I was a soldier in the British
        Army. During that time (I) learned (it) in India.
Vijay:  Even now you know Hindi well.
Driver: For a long time I have been learning yoga and meditation;
        therefore, (I) did not forgot Hindi.
Vijay:  This is very good; otherwise even Indians forget Hindi here.
Driver: This is true.


SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
tao                 to               as regards (particle)
qaaoD,a             thoRa            little, few
baaolanaa           bolna (+/–ne)    to speak
baaola laonaa       bol lena (+ne)   to speak for one’s benefit
baaola loata háU\   bol leta ho      (I can) speak
saIKnaa             sckhna (+ne)     to learn
samaya              samaya (m.)      time
saOinak             ssnik (m.)       soldier
ABaI BaI            abhc bhc         even now
kaf,I               kafc             enough, sufficient
BaUlanaa            bhelna (+/–ne)   to forget
nahIM tao           nahm to          otherwise
yahaá               yahk             here



Notes
Linguistic attitudes and hyper-politeness

The linguistic attitudes of Indians are very interesting. A foreigner
with minimal linguistic competence (even limited to just a few words)
in Indian languages will be showered with compliments such as
‘you speak excellent Hindi’ and ‘you speak beautiful Hindi’. This
is more of a welcome gesture than a faithful reflection of one’s
linguistic competence. So try to understand the main intention
behind such compliments. Also, do not be quick to judge your
complimenter with suspicion. They are not mocking your linguistic
competence.
178                                             Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      Formulaic expression: maaf, kIijayao maf kcjiye ‘forgive
      me/excuse me’

      The English expression ‘excuse me’ (‘I beg your pardon’ in British
      English) is ambiguous in a number of ways. We pointed out earlier,
      in Unit 2, that when the main function of ‘excuse me’ is to get
      attention, then it is paraphrased as ‘please say’ or ‘please listen’. In
      this dialogue, Vijay did not hear the driver at first and then asked
      him to repeat his statement; this calls for an apology. Thus Vijay
      appropriately uses maaf, kIijayao maf kcjiye. The first part of the expres-
      sion maaf, maf, ‘pardoned’ is the short adjectival form of the noun maaf,I
      mafc ‘forgiveness’, which is used with the verb krnaa karna ‘to do’.
      (Remember the ‘transformer’ verbs outlined in the last unit.) Thus,
      this expression is like other conjunct verbs you have encountered in
      earlier dialogues:

         Noun         Verb
         maaf,        krnaa
         maf          karna
         psand        krnaa
         pasand       karna
         irpaoT-      krnaa
         riporT       karna

      The polite imperative form of maaf, krnaa maf karna is maaf, kIijayao maf
      kcjiye. You guessed it right; the subject AaPa ap and the object mauJakao
      mujh ko ‘me’ are implied.

      The internal obligative (one’s inner need):
      mauJakao jaanaa hO mujhko jana hs ‘I need to go’
      The Hindi counterpart of the English expression ‘you need to go
      downtown’ is

         Aapkao    Da]naTa]na    jaanaa   hO.
         apko   downtown jana hs
         you-to downtown to go is
         You need to go downtown.

      The internal obligation is expressed by the infinitive form followed
      by the ‘to be’ verb form. The subject is always the experiencer sub-
      ject with the kao ko postposition. In the above sentence the ‘to be’
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                               179


verb is in the present tense form. In short, the internal obligatives
have the following structure:


subject                     infinitive verb                          ‘to be’ verb

+ kao ko                    jaanaa jana                              hO hs       is
                                                                     qaa tha was
                                                                     haogaa hoga will be


   Examples:       Aapkao   Da]naTa]na        jaanaa   hO.
                   apko downtown jana hs.
                   You need to go downtown.

                   Aapkao   Da]naTa]na        jaanaa   qaa.
                   apko downtown jana tha.
                   You needed to go downtown.

                   Aapkao   Da]naTa]na        jaanaa   haogaa.
                   apko downtown jana hoga.
                   You will need to go downtown.

In the case of an intransitive verb, the verb always stays masculine
singular. This is because the verb cannot agree with a subject
because it has to be followed by the postposition kao ko and there is
no object to agree with either.

Three types of capabilitatives

In the dialogue, you will have noticed the three different ways of
saying ‘one can speak Hindi’. This is the first:

   Aap     ihndI    AcCI     baaola       sakto               hMO.
   ap   hindc acchc bol                   sakte       hq
   you Hindi good speak                   can-present are
   You can speak Hindi well.

Notice the placement of saknaa sakna in the Hindi sentence. The sub-
ject is just plain nominative as in English. The verb agrees with the
subject. It is saknaa sakna which receives the tense conjugation and it
is preceded by the plain stem form of the verb.
180                                                          Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


         The second way is:

         maOM     qaaoD,I              qaaoD,I       ihndI      baaola     laota         hUá.
         mq thoRc           thoRc hindc                         bol leta                 ho.
         I    little little Hindi speak                         take-present             am
         I can speak Hindi a little.

      When one does not have native-like or full competence in a skill,
      this construction is used. In other words, this type of expression is
      used to express ‘partial competence’ and it usually has quantifiers
      such as qaaoD,a thoRa ‘a little/few’ with it. Notice the clustering of the
      two verbs – bol baaola ‘to speak’ and laonaa lena ‘to take’. It is the second
      verb which carries the tense/aspect form. These types of verb are
      called ‘compound’ verbs. We will discuss this class of verbs in detail
      later on. For the time being just memorize this expression.
         The third way is like saying ‘Hindi comes to you’ as in

         Aapkao             ABaI BaI         ihndI       AatI                      hO.
         apko    abhc bhc     hindc atc             hs
         you-to now even Hindi come-present is
         You even now know Hindi, or You even now know (how to
         speak) Hindi. (lit. Hindi even now comes to you)

      In this construction the verb is Aanaa ana ‘to come’ and the subject is
      an experiential/dative subject. Remember that dative subjects are
      marked with the postposition kao ko. The verb agrees with ‘Hindi’,
      which is feminine singular. Unless otherwise modified with a quan-
      tifier denoting meagreness, this construction expresses ‘full’ or ‘near
      complete’ competence in a skill, to the extent that a skill comes to a
      person without any conscious effort.

      This construction – ‘Hindi comes to you’ – is restricted to skills such
      as swimming, playing the sitar or any other musical instrument. It
      cannot be used in expressions such as ‘I know John.’

      Compare the following two sentences:

         ]sakao               tOrnaa             Aata                    hO.
         usko      tsrna    ata            hs
         he/she-to to swim come-present is
         (S)he knows (how to) swim. (lit. Swimming/to swim comes to
         him/her)
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                           181


The verb agrees with the infinitive form tOrnaa tsrna which is mascu-
line singular.

  maOM     jaa^na        kao      jaanata               hUá.
  mq John ko                      janta                 ho.
  I    John object                know-present          am
  I know John.

However, one cannot say ‘John comes to me.’

Focus, emphasis and word order
In the dialogue, Vijay asks the driver

  ihndI         Aapnao            khaá      saIKIÆ
  hindc apne         kahk    sckh c?
  Hindi you agent where learned
  Where did you learn Hindi?

Normal word order is as follows:

  Aapnao             ihndI        khaá      saIKIÆ
  apne       hindc kahk      sckh c?
  you agent Hindi where learned
  Where did you learn Hindi?

Since Hindi is the subject of the discussion, ‘Hindi’, which is the
object of the sentence, is moved to the beginning of the sentence. If
you have the recording, you will hear a slight emphasis on the word,
‘Hindi’. In other words, an element of a sentence can be pulled out
of its normal place in a sentence and placed at its beginning to
express focus or emphasis.

The particle tao to ‘as regards’
We came across the use of tao to in the sense of ‘then’. However,
observe that in the following two examples tao to follows a con-
stituent rather than appearing in the clause-initial position in a
‘when–then’ type of sentence.

  Aaap tao                     bahut     AcCI   ihndI          baaola   sakto   hOM.
  ap   to-particle bahut acchc hindc bol       sakte hq.
  you as regards very good Hindi speak can-present are
  As regards you, you can speak very good Hindi.
182                                                  Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


          yao     tao             bahut      AcCa      hO.
          ye   to-particle bahut accha hs
          this as regards very        good is
          As regards this, this is very good.

      The particle tao to is another way of expressing emphasis but implies
      some sense of exclusion. The first sentence says ‘As regards you, you
      can speak very good Hindi’ and implies that ‘others (from your
      group) cannot speak very good Hindi’.


      Compound verb BaUla jaanaa bhel jana ‘to forget’

      Observe another example of a compound verb in dialogue:

          yahaá    ihndustanaI     BaI      ihndI      BaUla      jaato            hMO.
          yahk hindustanc bhc      hindc bhel                     jate       hq.
          here Indians      also Hindi forget                     go-present are
          Here even Indians forget Hindi.

      The two verbs are clustered together – BaUla bhel and jaanaa jana. They
      share the chore of expressing meaning. BaUla bhel, the first verb, is in
      the form of a stem and conveys the main meaning, whereas jaanaa jana
      carries the tense form but does not convey its literal meaning
      of ‘going’. As promised, we will detail this class of verb later. For
      the time being satisfy yourself with the ‘sharing’ nature of Hindi
      compound verbs.


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                  (CD 2; 18)

      @yaa Aapkao ihndI ilaKnaI AatI hOÆ kyA Apko hind C
      lik hnC AtC hS? Can you write Hindi?
      Vijay and the driver continue to talk to each other. The topic of discus-
      sion continues to be the Hindi language.

      ivajaya:      @yaa Aapkao ihndI ilaKnaI AatI hOÆ
      Vijay:        kya apko hindc likhnc atc hs?
      D/a[var:      jy,aada nahIM. AamaI- maoM kBaI–kBaI ilaKnaI pD,tI qaI laoikna Aba kao[- ja$rt
                    nahIM.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                                    183


Driver: zyada nahm. army mg kabhc-kabhc likhnc paRtc thc lekin ab
         koc zarerat nahm.
ivajaya: ihndI maoM @yaaoM ilaKnaa pD,ta qaaÆ
Vijay:   hindc mg kyõ likhna paRta tha?
D/a[var: sandoSa kaoD AaOr sandoSaaoM ko ilayao – K,asakr yaUraop jaanao vaalao sandoSaaoM ko
         ilayao. Da]naTa]na maoM kuC kama hO?
Driver: secret codes aur sandeshõ ke liye – xaskar Europe jane
         vale sandeshõ ke liye. Downtown mg kuch kam hs?
ivajaya: ibajalaI ka ibala donaa qaa. Aaja fursat imalaIÊ tao saaocaa ik Kud vahaá jaa}á.
Vijay:   bijlc ka bill dena tha. aj fursat milc, to soca ki xud vahk jao.
D/a[var: tao vah dF,tr Aanao vaalaa hO ... Asala maoM Agalaa sTap hO.
Driver: to vo daftar ane vala hs . . . asal mg agla stop hs.
ivajaya: AcCaÊ namaskar.
Vijay:   accha, namaskar.
D/a[var: namaskar.
Driver: namaskar.

Vijay:        Do you know (how to) write Hindi? (lit. does to write
              Hindi come to you?)
Driver:       Not much. In the army I had to write sometimes but now
              (there) is no need (to write in Hindi).
Vijay:        Why did (you) have to write in Hindi?
Driver:       For secret codes and messages, especially for messages going
              to Europe. Do (you) have some work downtown?
Vijay:        (I) needed to pay the electric bill (lit. I need to give the
              electricity bill). Today (I) had (some) free time so I thought
              I would go myself (i.e. in person).
Driver:       Then (in that case), that office is about to come up . . . in
              fact, (it) is the next stop.
Vijay:        Okay. Goodbye.
Driver:       Bye.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
ilaKnaa        likhna (+ne)                to write
j,yaada        zyada (invariable)          more
kBaI           kabhc                       ever
kBaI–kBaI      kabhc-kabhc                 sometimes
pD,naa         paRna                       to fall, to lie down; in compound verbs
                                             ‘to have to’
ja,$rt         zarerat (f.)                need, necessity
saMdoSa        sandesh (m.)                message
184                                               Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      K,asakr         xaskar                 especially, particularly
      jaanao vaalao   jane vale              going
      kama haonaa     kam hona (+ko)         to have work
      ibajalaI        bijlc (f.)             electricity, lightning
      fursat          fursat (f.)            free time, spare time, leisure
      K,ud            xud                    oneself
      jaanaa          jana (–ne)             to go
      jaa}á           jao                    should go (subjunctive)
      dF,tr           daftar (m.)            office
      Aanao vaalaa    ane vala               about to come
      Asala maoM      asal mg                in fact, in reality
      Agalaa          agla (m. adj.)         next


      Notes
      Variation: ihndI ilaKnaI AatI hO Hindi likhnc ati hs or
      ihndI ilaKnaa Aata hO Hindi likhna ata hs
      In the Standard-Hindi-speaking area, the verb and the preceding
      infinitive form agree with the object in number and gender, whereas
      in the Eastern-Hindi-speaking area both remain invariable, i.e.
      masculine singular.

      Standard Hindi                                   Eastern Hindi

      Aapkao ihndI       ilaKnaI AatI hO.              Aapkao ihndI ilaKnaa Aata hO.
      apko hindc (f.) likhnc atc hs.                   apko hindc likhna ata hs.
      you know how to write Hindi.                     you know how to write Hindi.
      Aapkao Kt        ilaKnao   hMO.                  Aapkao Kt       ilaKnaa   hO.
      apko xat       likhne hq.                        apko xat       likhna hs.
      you-to letters to write are (m. pl.)             you-to letters to write is (m. sg.)


      However, the following sentence in our dialogue

           ibajalaI       ka ibala             donaa       qaa.
           bijlc       ka bill             dena tha.
           electricity of bill (m. sg.) to give was
           (I) needed to pay the electric bill.

      remains the same in both dialects because in Standard Hindi the
      agreement is with bill which is masculine singular.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                      185


The external obligative (compulsion): mauJakao jaanaa pD,ta hO
mujhko jana paRta hs ‘I have to go’
The only difference between the internal and the external obligative
is that in the latter the infinitive is followed by the verb pD,naa paRna
‘to lie down’ instead of the verb haonaa hona ‘to be’. The external oblig-
ative expresses ‘an external pressure/compulsion to do something’
rather than ‘one’s own internal need to do something’. Compare the
two types of obligatives:

Internal obligative (inner need)
   Aapkao    ihndI             ilaKnaI          hO.
   apko   hindc          likhnc         hs.
   you-to Hindi (f. sg.) write (f. sg.) is
   You need to write Hindi.

External obligative (compulsion)
   Aapkao    ihndI             ilaKnaI                pD,tI             hO.
   apko   hindc          likhnc                       paRtc             hs.
   you-to Hindi (f. sg.) to write (f. sg.)            lie down (f. sg.) is
   You have to write Hindi.

In Eastern Hindi the infinitive and the verb form are in the mascu-
line singular form, i.e. ilaKnaa hO likhna hs and ilaKnaa pD,ta hO likhna paRta
hs, respectively.
   Now, take a look at the use of the external obligative in our
dialogue:

   AamaI-  maoM kBaI-kBaI    ilaKnaI            pD,tI             qaI.
   army mg kabhc-kabhc likhnc                   paRtc             thc.
   Army in sometimes to write (f. sg.) lie down (f. sg.) was
   I had to write sometimes in the Army. (lit. I used to have to write
   sometimes in the Army)

The omitted subject mauJakao mujhko ‘to me’ is experiential and the
object is Hindi. The tense form chosen is the past habitual. If the
act of compelled writing was carried out only once, the verb pD,naa
paRna would have to be in the simple past form, i.e. pD,I. paRc and
the adverb kBaI-kBaI kabhc-kabhc would have to be dropped.
   There is a striking similarity between the verb pD,naa paRna ‘to lie
down’ and pZ,naa paRhna ‘to read/study’.
186                                           Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      Negative-incorporated words: ‘nobody’, ‘nowhere’,
      ‘never’, etc.

      Have a look at the Hindi expression ‘now (I have) no need of Hindi
      writing’:

         Aba      kao[-   ja$rt      nahIM.
         ab   koc     zarerat nahm.
         now some need         not
         Now (I have) no need.

      Negative words such as ‘nobody’, ‘nowhere’, ‘never’ are simply derived
      from their positive Hindi counterparts and the negative particle
      nahIM nahm is placed in its original position, i.e. right before the verb.
         kao[- koc someone   nahIM nahm = no one, nobody
         khIM kahm somewhere nahIM nahm = nowhere
         kBaI kabhc ever     nahIM nahm = never

      The immediate future: the vaalaa vala construction

      vaalaa vala is quite notorious for the meaning it renders and the beha-
      viour it exhibits. It has many facets. Here, we will examine the
      cases in which vaalaa vala follows an infinitive verbal form and thus
      marks the ‘immediate future’ tense.

         vah      dftr             Aanao      vaalaa          hO.
         vo    daftar           ane      vala      hs
         that office (m. sg.) to come about is
         That office is about to come up (i.e. the next stop is that office).

      The many facets of vaalaa vala become evident from the following two
      facts: (1) it acts like a postposition and exercises peer pressure on
      the preceding infinitive form, and consequently the infinitive form
      becomes oblique; and (2) it agrees with the subject in number and
      gender in the way that is typical of an adjective ending in -a. Now,
      observe one more example of such usage:

         gaaD,I           jaanao   vaalaI              qaI.
         gaRC           jane  valC           thC.
         train (f. sg.) to go about (f. sg.) was (f. sg.)
         The train was about to go/leave.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                               187


It might be puzzling to see how vaalaa vala can still be considered an
example of the ‘immediate future’. However, in this example, vaalaa
vala still renders the ‘immediate future’ with reference to the past. In
short, the structure of the ‘immediate future’ construction in Hindi
is as follows:

  subject (nominative) stem + nao ne            vaalaa vala verb ‘to be’
                                                vaalaI valc
                                                vaalao vale

The agentive vaalaa vala construction

In comparison with the above examples, observe the position of
vaalaa vala in the following phrase. Here, its best literal translation
is the English agentive suffix ‘-er’.

  yaUraop    jaanao    vaalao   sandoSaao,M   ko ilayao
  Europe jane   vale sandeshõ ke liye
  Europe to go -er messages for
  For the Europe-going messages. (lit. for the Europe go-er
  messages)

Can you guess the meaning of the following the phrases?

  Kolanao vaalaa khelne vala and pZ,nao vaalaI paRhne valc

The meaning is ‘player’ and ‘reader’, respectively. In the former a
masculine singular head (e.g. ‘boy’) is implied whereas the feminine
singular head (e.g. ‘girl’) is implied in the latter.
   The meaning of the vaalaa vala phrase is often contextually governed.
For example, the phrase

  idllaI      vaalaa
  dillc       vala
  Delhi       -er

means ‘the person who lives in Delhi’. However, if the phrase is
used in the context of a train or vehicle, it can mean either ‘the
train which goes/is going to Delhi’ or ‘a vehicle which is made in
Delhi’.
188                                              Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      Formulaic expressions: ‘I have some work’ and
      ‘Are you free?’

         @yaa  Aapkao Da]na Ta]na maoM kuC kama hO?
         kya   apko    downtown mg kuch kam hs?
         what you-to downtown in some work is
         Do you have some work downtown?

         Aaja      mauJakao    fursat                   imalaI.
         aj     mujhko fursat             milc.
         today me-to free/spare time (f.) got
         Today I was free.

      The English expressions such as ‘I am busy’ and ‘I am free’ are
      paraphrased as ‘to me the work is’ and ‘to me the free/leisure/spare
      time is’. Similarly, the best way to ask ‘Are you free?’ is

         Aapkao       fursat       hOÆ
         apko         fursat       hs?

      and ‘are you busy?’ is

         Aapkao       kama       hOÆ
         apko         kam        hs?

      The subjunctive

      The subjunctive expresses the idea of a possibility. Expressions
      with words such as ‘perhaps’ and suggestion (e.g. ‘Shall we go?’), or
      permission (e.g. ‘May I come in?’) usually employ the subjunctive.

         maMOnao     saaocaa      ik     K,ud   vahaá     jaa}á.
         mqne     soca       ki    xud vahk jao
         I-agent thought that self there go (subjunctive)
         I thought that (I) myself would go there.

      Verbs such as caahnaa cahna ‘to want’, saaocanaa socna ‘to think’ (which are
      called non-factive verbs) and jaananaa janna ‘to know’ (which belongs to
      the class of factive verbs) select a subjunctive verb form in their
      subordinate clause, i.e. jaa}á jao.
         The subjunctives are very simple to form. The magic trick is to
      take any future form and just drop the future ending, i.e. gaa ga, gao ge
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                        189


and gaI gc. For instance, the corresponding subjunctive forms of
hma imalaoMgao ham milgge ‘we will meet’, tuma jaaAaogao tum jaoge ‘you will go’
and maOM jaa}ágaI mq jaogc ‘I will go’ are: hma imalaoM ham milg ‘we shall meet’,
tuma jaaAao tum jao ‘you would go’, and maOM jaa}á mq jao (with rising
intonation) ‘may I go?’, respectively.

The emphatic reflexive: K,ud xud ‘oneself’

The emphatic pronoun K,ud xud is very similar to English emphatic
pronouns, with the difference that the Hindi form K,ud xud remains
invariable whereas the English emphatic pronouns vary according
to their subject. In

     maMOnao       saaocaa        ik        maOM       K,u,d   vahaá    jaa}á .
     mqne          soca           ki        mq         xud     vahk     jao

the emphatic form will always remain unchanged even if the subject
of the (subordinate) clause changes.


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 3                                     (CD 2; 20)

maorI tbaIyat bahut Kraba hO. merC tabCyat bahut
xarAb hS I am very sick
Professor John Ryder is on his first research trip to rural India.
He reached his village at the beginning of the Monsoon season.
Although he took all precautions and vaccinations before leaving for
India, he awakens one night with a high fever and diarrhoea. He calls
Dr Naim’s residence. Dr Naim’s wife picks up the phone.

jaa^na:                 hOlaaoÊ @yaa Da• naa[ma hOMÆ
John:                   hello, kya Dr. Naim hq?
naa[ma kI p%naI:        jaI nahIMÊ kao[- j,a$rI baat hOÆ
Naim’s wife:            jc nahm, koc zarerc bat hs?
jaa^na:                 maorI tbaIyat bahut Kraba hO.
John:                   merc tabcyat bahut xarab hs.
naa[ma kI p%naI:        ek marIja kao doKnao gayao hOM.
Naim’s wife:            ek marcz ko dekhne gaye hq.
jaa^na:                 iktnaI dor maoM laaOToMgaoÆ
John:                   kitnc der mg lauTgge?
190                                                    Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      naa[ma kI p%naI:    maoro #y,aala sao jaldI Aa jaayaoMgao. mauJao Apnaa TOilaf,aona nambar AaOr pta
                          do dIijayao. Aato hI ]nhoM Baoja dUágaI.
      Naim’s wife:        mere xyal se jaldc a jaygge. mujhe apna Telcfon
                          (telephone) number aur pata de dcjiye. ate hc unhg
                          bhej dogc.
      jaa^na:             bahut–bahut Qanyavaad.
      John:               bahut-bahut dhanyavad.
      John:               Hello, is Dr Naim (there)?
      Naim’s wife:        No, is (there) something urgent?
      John:               (I) am very sick. (lit. my condition/health is very bad)
      Naim’s wife:        He went to see a patient.
      John:               When will he return? (lit. in how much period of time
                          will he return?)
      Naim’s wife:        I think (he) will come (back) soon. (lit. with my
                          opinion [he] will come soon)
                          Please give me your phone number and address. As
                          soon as (he) returns, (I) will send him (to your place).
      John:               Thanks a lot.

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      ja,,$rI         zarerc                 important, urgent, necessary
      tbaIyat         tabcyat (f.)           health, disposition
      K,raba          xarab                  bad
      marIj,a         marcz (m.)             patient
      dor             der (f.)               delay, time (period of, slot of )
      laaOTnaa        lauTana (–ne)          to return
      laaOToMgao      lauTgge                will return
      #y,aala         xyal (m.)              opinion, thought
      jaldI           jaldc                  quickly
      Aa jaanaa       a jana (–ne)           to come (compound verb)
      Aa jaayaoMgao   a jaygge               will come (compound verb)
      mauJao          mujhe                  to me
      pta             pata (m.)              address
      do donaa        de dena (+ne)          to give (compound verb)
      do dIijayao     de dcjiye              please give (compound verb)
      Aato hI         ate hc                 as soon as (he) comes
      ]nhoM           unhg                   him (honorific)
      Baojanaa        bhejna (+ne)           to send
      Baoja donaa     bhej dena (+ne)        to send (compound verb)
      Baoja dUágaI    bhej dogc              will send (compound verb)
      Qanyavaad       dhanyavad              thanks
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                            191


Notes
Variation

tabcyat can also be spelled with a short i (i.e. tabiyat tibayat).


Present and past perfective forms

   vao                  ek        marIj,a       kao     doKnao           gayao   hOM.
   ve        ek     marcz     ko     dekhne        gaye hq.
   he (hon.) one patient obj. to see (obl.) gone are
   He went to see a patient. (lit. he has gone to see a patient)

   @yaa          Aap       kBaI          Aagara gayao      hMOÆ
   kya   ap    kabhc agra gaye hq?
   what you ever Agra went are
   Have you ever been (lit. gone) to Agra?

   haá,   maOM         gayaa      hUá.
   hk, mq gaya ho.
   yes I     went am
   Yes, I have been (there). (lit. Yes, I have gone there.)

   haá,   dao           saala       phlao        maOM   gayaa     qaa.
   hk, do     sal    pshsle mq gaya tha.
   yes two years ago          I    went was
   Yes, two years ago I went (there). (lit. Yes, two years ago, I had
   gone (there).)

By adding the present forms (hUá ho ‘am’, hO hs ‘is’, hMO hq ‘are’ and hao ho
‘are’ (you)) and past forms (qaa tha ‘was’, qao the ‘were’, qaI th c ‘was’ and
qaIM th m ‘were’) of the verb ‘to be’ to the perfective form, one can get
present and past perfective forms, respectively. The present perfect
indicates the completed action which has relevance for the present
situation and the past perfective shows relevance to the past. That is
why the present perfective and past perfective are called ‘recent past’
and ‘remote past’. What is notable is that in the first sentence and
the last sentence English will use the simple perfective form but
Hindi will use the present and the past perfective, respectively. The
past perfect in English is viewed with reference to an event in the
past, as in ‘When I was in Agra, he had already come.’
192                                        Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      Compound verbs

      We have already mentioned compound verbs in Hindi. Observe
      another example from our dialogue:

         maoro   #,yaala       sao   vao       jaldI   Aa     jaayaMogao.
         mere xyal         se    ve        jaldc       a    jaygge
         my     opinion with he (hon.) soon            come go-will
         I think he will come (back) soon.

      Note the two verbs Aa a ‘come’ and jaa ja ‘go’ are clustered in the verb
      phrase. The meaning of the sentence is not merely an accumulative
      or conjunctive meaning rendered by the verbs. In other words, the
      sentence does not mean ‘he will come and go’. On the contrary, the
      action of coming is being described and the verb jaanaa jana ‘to go’ is
      only a responsible carrier of the tense information. It also loses its
      literal meaning and adds some related but new overtone or emphasis
      to the first verb. In the case of capabilitative construction with saknaa
      sakna, the helping verb adds a clear (literal) meaning; however, as
      you will see below, this is usually not the case with helping verbs
      such as Aanaa ana and jaanaa jana.
          You can view compound verbs as people married to each other
      or romantically in love with one another, with both willing to
      cooperate to the extent of being dependent on each other in some
      ways. The compound verb

         Aa      jaayaoMgao.
         a       jaygge

      is composed of two units: (1) the main verb Aa a ‘come’, which is in
      its stem form and is totally dependent on the second unit, i.e. (2) the
      helping verb – jaa ja ‘go’ – for tense information. In addition to
      supplying tense information, the other roles played by the helping
      verb are described below:

      jaanaa jana as a helping verb
      As we already know, the literal meaning of jana jaanaa is ‘to go’. As a
      helping verb, it refers to the ‘transformation of a state or action,
      completeness or finality’.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                               193


Simple verbs                              Compound verbs

Aanaa ana          to come                Aa jaanaa a jana          to come back, arrive
Kanaa khana to eat                        Ka jaanaa kha jana to eat up
pInaa pcna         to drink               pI jaanaa pc jana         to drink up
samaJanaa samajhna to understand          samaJa jaanaa samajh jana to understand fully
haonaa hona        to be                  hao jaanaa ho jana        to become
BaUlanaa bhelna to forget                 BaUla jaanaa bhel jana to forget completely


donaa dena as a helping verb
The literal meaning of donaa dena is ‘to give’. When one gives some-
thing, the beneficiary of the action is someone other than the subject.
That is exactly what is added to the main verb by the helping verb
donaa dena, i.e. to do an action for others. In Dialogue 3, the doctor’s
wife first asks for John’s address and telephone number. The expres-
sion she uses is as follows:

   mauJao    Apnaa TolaIfaona        nambar         AaOr pta       do   dIijayao.
   mujhe apna telephone number aur pata de                              dcjiye.
   Give me your telephone number and address.

She then says:

   Aato     hI ]nhoM    Baoja   dUágaI.
   ate hc unhg bhej dogc.
   As soon as he comes, I will send him.

The compound verbs do donaa de dena and Baoja donaa bhej dena are used to
highlight the beneficiary of the actions. The simple corresponding
verbs donaa dena ‘to give’ and Baojanaa bhejna ‘to send’ are unable to emph-
asize the beneficiary. In the first sentence, the direct beneficiary of
the action is the wife herself and in the second sentence John is the
beneficiary of the wife’s action of sending Dr Naim to his house.

laonaa lena as a helping verb
The verb laonaa lena means ‘to take’. You can now predict its meaning
as a helping verb. It conveys ‘doing for oneself’, i.e. for the benefit of
the subject. For example, in answer to the request for the telephone
number and address, John could have answered as follows:
194                                                    Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


         AcCa          ilaK       laIijae.
         accha, likh      lcjiye
         OK      write take-imp.
         Please, write (it) down for your benefit.

      The compound verb ilaK laonaa likh lena stresses that Dr Naim’s wife
      is the direct beneficiary of the action of writing down the address
      and telephone number.
         In the previous dialogue, we saw the other meaning (i.e. partial
      competence) of laonaa lena when used as a helping verb with skill verbs.

      -to hI -te hc ‘as soon as’

      The addition of -to hI -te hc to the verbal stem renders the meaning of
      ‘as soon as’, as in

         Aato hI                      ]nhMo           Baoja       dUágaI.
         ate hc             unhg         bhej dogc.
         come-as soon as him (hon.) send give-will
         (I) will send him as soon as (he) comes (back).

      The pitfalls:

      ‘I think’

      Compare and contrast the Hindi phrase with its English translation.

         mMaoro #yaala sao       mere xyal se . . .           I think . . .

      The Hindi equivalent is either mMaro o #yaala sao mere xyal se ‘with my opinion’
      or mMaoro #yaala maoM mere xyal mg ‘in my opinion’. The Hindi verb saaocanaa
      socna ‘to think’ is not acceptable in this context, as in the following
      sentence:

         maOM         saaocata                hUá.
         mq           socta                   ho
         I            think-present           am

      The English verb ‘to think’ is ambiguous: (1) it refers to the process
      of thinking, as in ‘I will think of something’, and (2) it expresses
      an opinion, as in ‘I think he is a nice man.’ In the latter sense, it
      is paraphrased as ‘In my opinion he is a nice man.’ The failure to
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                 195


distinguish between the two types of ‘think’ is the most common
source of errors on the part of English learners of Hindi as a second
language.

Compound verbs
Failure to understand the shades in meaning conveyed by compound
verbs can take a toll on communication. For example, if a student
goes to a professor and requests a letter of recommendation, it makes
a significant difference whether the student uses

   recommendation letter            ilaiKyao         likhiye
   recommendation letter            ilaK dIijayao    likh dcjiye
   recommendation letter            ilaK laIijayao   likh lcjiye

Even though the polite forms are used in all three expressions, the
only appropriate choice is the second. The first and last have the
potential to offend the professor. The first is polite, but still a com-
mand, and the last claims the professor to be the direct beneficiary
of the act of writing a letter of recommendation.
   Similarly, be gentle and sensitive with the use of obligatives and
capabilitatives.

Coping skills
If you are unsure which form to use, compound or simple verb, the
best thing you can do is to spell out the beneficiary maoro ilae mere liye
‘for me’ with simple verbs. By doing this, you cannot totally elim-
inate the ill-effects of making a bad choice, but you can reduce the
damage considerably.


AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1
Underline the appropriate choice of subject in the following sen-
tences and then translate the sentences into English:

1 ( maMO/mauJakao/ maOMnao) isatar AatI hO.
  (mq/mujhko/mqne) sitar atc hs.
2 @yaa (Aap/Aapkao/Aapnao) tOr sakto hOMÆ
  kya (ap/apko/apne) tsr sakte hq?
196                                                    Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      3 (]sakao/vah/]sanao) khaá jaanaa hOÆ
        (usko/vo/usne) kahk jana hs?
      4 (vao/]nhaMonao/]nakao) saMgaIt kba saIKaÆ
        (ve/unhõne/unko) sargct kab sckha?
      5 vah saolsamaOna hO. (]sakao/]sanao/vaho) baahr jaanaa pD,ta hO.
        vo salesman hs. (usko/usne/vo) bahar jana paRta hs.
      6 jaa^na kao bahut kama hO. [sailae (vao/]sakao/]sanao) kuC fursat nahIM hO.
        John ko bahut kam hs. isliye (ve/usko/usne) kuch fursat nahm hs.

      Exercise 2
      Complete the following sentences by supplying the missing parts of
      the verb:

      1   ibala kao jaldI hO @yaaMoik ]sakI gaaD,I dsa imanaT maoM jaa ____ ________ hO.
        Bill ko jaldc hs kyõki uskc gaRc das minute mg ja ___ ____ hs.
      2 D/a[var jaldI kraoÊ maoro daost kI F,laa[T Aa ___ ___ hO.
        Driver jaldc karo, mere dost kc flight a ____ ___ hs.
      3 sadI- ka maaOsama qaaÊ jaldI baf- igar ___ ____ qaI.
        sardc ka mausam tha, jaldc barf gir ___ ____ thc.
      4 paTI- ko ilae maohmaana phuáca ____ ______ hOM.
        party ke liye mshman pahjc ______ ________ hq.
      5 Saama ka samaya qaaÊ AMQaora hao ____ ______ qaa.
        sham ka samay tha, andhera ho ___ ______ tha.
      6 Aap kBaI ihndustana ga __ hOM.
        ap kabhc hindustan ga __ hq.

      Exercise 3
      Match the duties given on the left with the professions given on the
      right:

      1   AQyaapk          ]sakao kar calaanaI hO.
          adhyapak         usko kar calanc hs.
      2   Da^@Tr           ]sakao kpD,o Qaaonao hOM.
          doctor           usko kapRe dhone hq.
      3   gaayak           ]sakao pZ,anaa hO.
          gayak            usko paRhana hs.
      4   D/a[var          ]sakao ilaKnaa hO.
          driver           usko likhna hs.
      5   QaaobaI          ]sakao marIja kao doKnaa hO.
          dhobc            usko marcz ko dekhna hs.
Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?                                                                             197


6   laoKk                     ]sakao gaanaa hO.
    lekhak                    usko gana hs.

Exercise 4
Underline the appropriate helping verb(s) in the following sentences:

1   @yaa Aap maoro ilae irkaomaOMDoSana laOTr ilaK laMogao/dMogaoÆ
  kya ap mere liye recommendation letter likh (lgge/dgge)?
2 rat AayaI AaOr AMQaora hao (gayaa/Aayaa) qaa.
  rat ayc aur andhera ho (gaya/aya) tha.
3 maOM ihndI nahIM pZ, saktaÊ Aap yao Kt pZ, (laIijayao/dIijayao)
  mq hindc nahm paRh sakta, ap ye xat paRh (lcjiye/dcjiye).
4 vaao qaaoD,a qaaoD,a tOr (sakta/laota/Aata) hO,.
  vo thoRa thoRa tsr (sakta/leta/ata) hs.
5 ]sakao bahut AcCa naacanaa (sakta/laota/Aata) hO.
  usko bahut accha nacna (sakta/leta/ata) hs.
6 maOM AapkI baat ibalkula BaUla (Aayaa/gayaa).
  mq apkc bat bilkul bhel (aya/gaya).

Exercise 5
Write five sentences about the things you hated but had to do during
your childhood. The following sentence can serve as a model for
your answers.

    bacapna            maoM        mauJao     palak             KanaI       pD,tI                qaI.
    bacpan      mg mujhe palak              khanc paRtc                                          th c.
    childhood in to me spinach (f.) eat-to lay-present                                           was
    During childhood, I had (lit. used) to eat spinach.

Exercise 6                        (CD 2; 22)

If you have the recording, listen to the recorded passage. After
the beep, answer each statement either by saying saca sac (true) or
JaUz jheTh (false).
    Now circle either saca sac (true) or JaUz jheTh (false) for each
statement.

1   saaomavaar kao maOMnao kama ikyaa.                               sa (saca)      JaU (JaUz)
    somvar ko mq ne kam kiya.                                        s (true)       jh (false)
2   maMgalavaar kao maOM Apnao daost sao imalaa.                     sa (saca)      JaU (JaUz)
    margalvar ko mq apne dostõ se mila.                              s (true)       jh (false)
198                                                  Unit 7: Can you speak Hindi?


      3   bauQavaar kao Gar sao baahr nahIM gayaa.   sa (saca)       JaU (JaUz)
          budhvar ko ghar se bahar nahm gaya.        s (true)        jh (false)
      4   gauàvaar kao landna maoM hI rha.           sa (saca)       JaU (JaUz)
          guruvar ko Londan mg hc raha.              s (true)        jh (false)
      5   Sauk`vaar kao maorI tbaIyat zIk nahIM qaI. sa (saca)       JaU (JaUz)
          shukravar ko merc tabcyat Thck nahm thc. s (true)          jh (false)
      6   Sainavaar kao maOMnao kama ikyaa.          sa (saca)       JaU (JaUz)
          shanivar ko mqne kam kiya.                 s (true)        jh (false)
      7   rivavaar kao maOMnao Aarama ikyaa.         sa (saca)       JaU (JaUz)
          ravivar ko mqne aram kiya.                 s (true)        jh (false)
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                         199




8 mauJao caOk kOSa krvaanao hOM.
  mujhe cheque
  cash karvane hq
      I need to get cheques cashed




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  • understand causatives
  • use the present participial forms
  • understand more about compound verbs, subjunctives and
    obligatives
  • understand about auxiliary verb deletion with negation
  • use conditionals
  • highlight contrast
  • persuade someone
  • advise and caution someone
200                                    Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                                   (CD 2; 23)

      kuC prhoj,a kIijayao kuc h parhez kCjiye Be careful
      what you eat
      Finally, Dr Naim reaches John Ryder’s house. It is about eleven o’clock
      at night. Indian doctors still make house calls!

      jaa^naÁ     Aadaba Aja-Ê Da@Tr naa[ma.
      John:       adad arz, Dr Naim.
      Da^@TrÁ     AadabaÊ rayaDr saaihba. [sa baar k[- saala ko baad maulaakt hu[-.
      Dr Naim:    adab, Ryder sahib. is bar kac sal ke bad mulakat huc.
      jaa^naÁ     jaI haáÊ kao[- paáca saala baad.
      John:       jc hk, koc pkc sal bad.
      Da^@TrÁ     tXarIf riKe . . . AcCaÊ phlao bata[yaoÊ tbaIyat kOsaI hOÆ
      Dr Naim:    tashrcf rakhiye . . . accha, pshle bataiye, tabcyat kssc hs?
      jaa^naÁ     tbaIyat tao AcCI nahIMÊ nahIM tao [tnaI rat kao Aapkao tklaIf, na dota.
      John:       tabcyat to acchc nahm, nahm to itnc rat ko apko taklcf na
                  deta.
      Da^@TrÁ     tklaIf kI baat @yaa hOÆ yao tao maora fja-, hO. K,Or bauKar iktnaa hOÆ
      Dr Naim:    taklcf kc bat kya hs? ye to mera farz hs. xsr, buxar kitna
                  hs?
      jaa^naÁ     jaba ek GaMTo phlao maOMnao qamaa-maITr lagaayaaÊ tao ek saaO dao iDga`I qaa Aba
                  Saayad kuC j,yaada hao.
      John:       jab ek ghanTe pshle mqne thermometer lagaya, to ek sau
                  do degree tha ab shayad kuch zyada ho.
      Da^@TrÁ     AcCaÊ jara ifr qamaa-maITr lagaa[yao.
      Dr Naim: accha, zara phir thermometer lagaiye.
      (Dr Naim takes John’s pulse and temperature)
      Da^@TrÁ     bauKar qaaoD,a baZ, gayaa hO. dst BaI hOMÆ
      Dr Naim:    buxar thoRa baR gaya hs. dast bhc hq?
      jaa^naÁ     jaI haáÊ dao GaMTo maoM saat-Aaz baar baaqa$ma gayaa.
      John:       jc hk, do ghanTe mg sat-aTh bar bathroom gaya.
      Da^@TrÁ     ipClaI baar Aapnao bahut samaaosao Kayao qaoÊ AaOr [sa baarÆ
      Dr Naim:    pichlc bar apne bahut samose khaye the, aur is bar?
      jaa^naÁ     Saama kao kuC Aama Kayao.
      John:       sham ko kuch am khaye.
      Da^@TrÁ     maorI salaah maainayao . . . ek–dao mahInao tk Aap kuC prhoj,a kIijayaoÊ samaaosao
                  AaOr Aama band . maOM ek TIka lagaata hUá AaOr yah dvaa[- laIijayao. dao
                  gaaoilayaaá hr dao GaMTo . tao kla saubah ApnaI tbaIyat ko baaro maoM bata[yao . AcCaÊ
                  Aba Aarama kIijayao . maOM Aapko TolaIfaona ka [Mtj,aar k$ágaa . Kuda haif,ja,.
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                        201


Dr Naim:    merc salah maniye . . . ek-do mahcne tak ap kuch parhez
            kcjiye, samose aur am banda. mq ek Tcka lagata ho aur
            ye davac lcjiye. do goliyk har do ghanTe. to kal suba
            apnc tabcyat ke bare mg bataiye. accha ab aram kcjiye.
            mq apke Telifon ka intzar karoga. xuda hafiz.
jaa^naÁ     bahut bahut Sauik`yaaÊ Da@Tr saaihbaÊ Kuda haif,ja,.
John:       bahut bahut shukriya, Doctor sahib, xuda hafiz.

John:      Greetings, Dr Naim.
Dr Naim:   Greetings, Ryder sir, (we) meet again after several years.
John:      Yes, after about five years.
Dr Naim:   Please be seated . . . OK. First, tell (me), how you are
           feeling? (lit. how is (your) disposition?)
John:      As regards my disposition, I am not feeling well; otherwise
           I would not have bothered you so late at night.
Dr Naim: Why talk about trouble. This is my duty. Well, how high
           is the fever?
John:      An hour ago when I took my temperature, it was one
           hundred and two degrees. Now it might be slightly higher.
Dr Naim: Okay, again (let’s) take (your) temperature.
(Dr Naim takes John’s pulse and temperature)
Dr Naim: The fever has increased slightly; (do you) have diarrhoea
           too?
John:      Yes, (I) went to the bathroom about seven or eight times
           in the past two hours.
Dr Naim: The last time you ate many samosas and this time?
John:      In the evening (I) ate some mangoes.
Dr Naim: Please take my advice. For about one or two months
           exercise some caution (lit. do some abstinence). No more
           samosas and mangoes (lit. samosas and mangoes closed).
           I (will) give you an injection and (you) take this medicine
           Two pills every two hours. Then tell me tomorrow morning
           how you feel. I will wait for your call. Okay. Now get
           some rest. Goodbye.
John:      Many many thanks, doctor. Goodbye.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
Aadaba               adab (m.)                      salutation, greetings
Aj,a-                arz (f.)                       request
[sa baar             is bar                         this time
saala                sal (m.)                       year
202                                      Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      ko baad                    ke bad                  after
      maulaakat                  mulakat (f.)            meeting
      maulaakat haonaa           mulakat hona (–ne)      to meet
      tSarIf,                    tashrcf (f.)            (a term signifying respect)
      tSarIf, rKnaa              tashrcf rakhna (+ne)    to be seated
      tSarIf, laanaa             tashrcf lana (–ne)      to grace one’s place,
                                                            welcome, come
      phlao                      pshle                   first
      [tnaa                      itna (m. adj.)          so much/many, this much/
                                                            many
      rat                        rat (f.)                night
      tklaIf                     taklcf (f.)             trouble, bother
      tklaIf, donaa              taklcf dena (+ne)       to bother
      fj,a-                      farz (m.)               duty
      lagaanaa                   lagana (+ne)            to fix, apply
      Saayad                     shayad                  perhaps
      baZ,naa                    baRhna (–ne)            to increase, advance
      dst                        dasta (m.)              diarrhoea
      Aama                       am                      mango; as adj. common,
                                                            general
      salaah                     salah (f.)              advice
      salaah maananaa            salah manna (+ne)       to accept/take advice
      salaah laonaa              salah lena (+ne)        to seek/take advice
      mahInaa                    mahcna (m.)             month
      prhoj,a                    parhez (m.)             abstinence
      x sao prhoj,a krnaa        x se parhez karna (+ne) to abstain, avoid
      band                       banda                   to be closed
      band krnaa                 banda karna (+ne)       closed
      band haonaa                banda hona (–ne)        to close
      TIka lagaanaa              Tcka lagana (+ne)       to give an injection/a shot
      dvaa[- /dvaa               davac/dava (f.)         medicine
      gaaolaI                    golc (f.)               tablet, pill; bullet
      [Mtja,ar                   intzar (m./f.)          wait
      x (ka/kI) [Mtja,ar krnaa   x (ka/kc) intzar karna  to wait for x
                                    (+ne)
      Aarama                     aram (m.)               comfort, rest
      Aarama krnaa               aram karna (+ne)        to rest
      Kuda haif,ja,              xuda hafiz              goodbye
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                          203


Notes
‘We meet again after several years’
Another way of saying ‘we meet again after several years’ in Hindi is
something like ‘our meeting took place after several years’.

   k[-     saala (ko) baad              hmaarI      maulaakat    hu[-.
   kac     sal   (ke) bad               hamarc mulakat      huc.
   several years after                  our    meeting (f.) happened.

The politeness bug
Note the use of tXarIf riKe tashrcf rakhiye instead of baOize bsThiye
‘please sit’. As in English, when receiving a guest, we will usually say
‘Please have a seat’, or ‘Please be seated’, rather than ‘please sit’.
Similarly, it is more polite and much friendlier to use tXarIf riKe
tashrcf rakhiye than baOize bsThiye, particularly if the listener is a
Muslim. In English if the verb ‘sit’ is used, it is modified in some
form, e.g. ‘Please sit down for a while’; the same is true of the Hindi
verb baOz bsTh ‘sit’. If it is used, it needs to precede the polite form of
the verb Aa a ‘to come’ (e.g. Aa[eÊ baOize aiye, bsThiye ‘Please come
(and) sit’) or be followed by a question tag (e.g. baOize na bsThiye na
‘Please sit down, won’t you?’).

x ka [Mtja,ar krnaa ‘To wait for x’
The Hindi equivalent of the English ‘I was waiting for you’ turns
out to be

   maOM    Aapka [Mtja,ar          kr       rha     qaa.
   mq apka intzar          kar              raha    tha.
   I      your wait (m.) do                 ing     was
   i.e. I was doing your wait

The conditional: counter-factive
The Hindi sentence in our dialogue is as follows:

   [tnaI        rat     kao maMO    Aapkao         tklaIf na    dota.
   itnc    rat   ko mq ap-ko taklcf na deta.
   so much night at I  you-to bother not give-would have
204                                 Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      The previous sentence is a part of the ‘if’ clause which is implied.

        Agar     tbaIyat      zIk         haotI           tao . . .
        agar tabcyat       Thck hotc                      to . . .
        if    disposition fine were                       then . . .
        If my condition were fine . . .

      Note that the simple present form without the auxiliary verb is used
      in such counter-factive sentences. The ‘if’ clause implies that the
      condition has not been fulfilled; therefore, the action expressed by
      the ‘then’ clause did not take place. Consider another example of
      counter-factives:

        Agar     vah Aata           tao           maOM        jaata.
        agar vo ata,           to    mq jata
        if     he come-pres. then I       go-pres.
        If he had come, I would have come.

        Agar vah iktabaMo ilaKtI                    tao         hma     bahut   KuSa   haoto.
        agar vo kitabg likhtc,       to   ham bahut xush hote.
        if   she books write-present then we very happy be-pres.
        Had she written books, we would have been very happy.

      Thus, the English verb forms such as ‘had come’ and ‘would have
      gone’ are translated, not as a past tense form, but with the present
      imperfective without an auxiliary verb.


      Formulaic expression

      The Hindi expression

        tklaIf        kI    baat             @yaa                 hOÆ
        taklcf        kc    bat              kya                  hs
        bother        of    matter           what                 is

      is not a question sentence. It is equivalent to the English expressions
      ‘do not bother’ and ‘do not mention’. Thus, the Hindi question
      word @yaa kya is like ‘not’ in the expression in question. The verb
      form is always in the simple present rather than in the imperative
      form as in English.
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                            205


Negative particle: na na

We have already come across nahIM nahm ‘not’. Another Hindi negative
particle is na na, which occurs in constructions such as ‘neither . . . nor’,
counter-factives and polite imperatives. (See the Grammar section
for more details.)

The subjunctive

   Aba      bauKar              kuC           jyaada        hao.
   ab    buxar        kuch zyada ho
   now fever (m.s.) some more be-subjunctive
   The fever might be slightly more.

Since the context is the probable increase in fever, the Hindi verb
‘to be’ is in the subjunctive form. The verb agrees with bauKar buxar
‘fever’. Although the verb hao ho might appear to be in the simple
present tense form, it is not because tuma tum is not the subject in the
above sentence.

Compound verb with the helping verb: jaanaa jana

In the expression

   bauKar     qaaoD,a   baZ,                gayaa      hO.
   buxar thoRa baRh          gaya                      hs
   fever little increase went                          is
   The fever has shot up a little.

the compound verb baZ, jaanaa baRh jana is employed for the reasons
explained in the previous unit.

maorI salaah maainayao meri salah maniye ‘Accept my advice’
Hindi paraphrases the English expression ‘Take my advice’ as
‘Accept my advice’.

   maorI    salaah             maainayao.
   merc salah         maniye.
   my     advice (f.) accept-imperative
   Please accept my advice.
206                                      Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      The substitution of the verb laonaa lena ‘take’ produces an odd sentence
      in Hindi.


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2                                      (CD 2; 25)

      idllaI maoM gauma jaanaa dillC mG gum jAnA Lost in Delhi
      Philip Rosenberg is lost in downtown Delhi. He knows that somewhere
      in the vicinity there is an American Express office where he could cash
      some traveller’s cheques. In fact, he visited that office just two days
      ago. He does not remember its address either. He inquires from a
      stranger about its location:

      if,ilapÁ       yahaá pasa kao[- AmarIkna eo@saP`aOsa ka dF,tr hO. maOM dao idna phlao vahaá
                     gayaa qaaÊ laoikna Aaja nahIM imala rha.
      Philip:        yahk pas koc American Express ka daftar hs. mq do din
                     pshsle vahk gaya tha, lekin aj nahm mil raha.
      AjanabaIÁ      Aapkao pta maalUama hOÆ
      Stranger: apko pata malem hs?
      if,ilapÁ       maMO pta tao BaUla gayaa.
      Philip:        mq pata to bhel gaya.
      AjanabaIÁ      maoro #,yaala sao AgalaI saD,k pr AmarIkna eo@saP`aOsa ka dF,tr hO.
      Stranger: mere xyal se aglc saRak par Amercian Express ka daftar
                hs.
                (pointing to the street)
      if,ilapÁ  (seemingly puzzled) vah saD,k tao saundr hOÊ laaoga ]sao AgalaI saD,k
                     @yaaoM khto hMOÆ
      Philip:        (seemingly puzzled) vo saRak to sundar hs, log use aglc
                     saRak kyõ kshte hq?
      AjanabaIÁ      AgalaI ihndI ka Sabd hO AMga`ojaI ka nahIM. ‘AgalaI’ ka matlaba AMga`oj,aI maoM
                     ‘next’ hO.
      Stranger: aglc hindc ka shadba hs angrezc ka nahm. ‘aglc’ ka matlab
                angrezc mg ‘next’ hs.
      if,ilapÁ       bahut KUba.
      Philip:      bahut xeb.
      (Philip goes to the cashier’s window at the American Express office)
      if,ilapÁ       mauJao kuC T/Ovalarj,a caOk kOSa krvaanao hOM.
      Philip:        mujhe kuch traveller’s cheque cash karvane hq.
      kOiSayarÁ      kaOna–saI krnsaI maoM hOMÆ
      Cashier:       kaun sc currency mg hq?
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                                     207


if,ilapÁ     Amaoirkna Dalar. eo@sacaoMja roT @yaa hOÆ
Philip:      amrckan dollars. Exchange rate kya hs?
kOiSayarÁ    ek Amaoirkna Dalar caalaIsa $pyao ka hO.
Cashier:     ek amrckan dollar calcs rupaye ka hs.
(Philip signs the cheques and the cashier gives him the equivalent
amount in rupees)
kOiSayarÁ    kula dao saaO Dalarj,a. yao rho Aap ko Aaz hja,ar $pyao. igana laIijayao.
Cashier:     kul do sau dollars. ye rahe apke aTh hazar rupaye. gin
             lcjiye.
ifilapÁ      zIk hO. Qanyavaad.
Philip:      Thck hs. dhanyavad.

Philip:       (There) is an American Express office nearby. Two days
              ago I went there. But today I cannot find (it).
Stranger: Do you know the address?
Philip:       I forgot the address.
Stranger: I think the American Express office is on the next (i.e.
              aglc) street.
              (pointing to the street)
Philip:       (Seemingly puzzled) That street is a beautiful one. Why
              do people call it ‘ugly’?
Stranger: ‘aglC’ is a Hindi word, not English. In English the meaning
              of ‘aglC’ is ‘next’.
Philip:       (That’s) great!
(Philip goes to the cashier’s window at the American Express office)
Philip:       I need to get some traveller’s cheques cashed.
Cashier:      In which currency are they?
Philip:       In American dollars. What is the exchange rate?
Cashier:      One American dollar to forty rupees.
(Philip signs the cheques and the cashier gives him the equivalent
amount in rupees.)
Cashier:      A total of two hundred dollars. Here are your eight
              thousand rupees. Please count it (for your own sake).
Philip:       That’s fine (lit. they are fine). Thanks.


SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
dF,tr        daftar (m.)              office
imalanaa     milna (+ko)              to find, to receive
Agalaa       agla (m. adj.)           next
Sabd         shabda (m.)              word
208                                          Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      AMga`oj,aI      angrezc (f.)                 the English language
      AMga`oj,a       angrez (m.)                  an English man
      matlaba         matlab (m.)                  meaning
      bahut KUba      bahut xeb                    great! splendid!
      kOSa krnaa      cash karna (+ne)             to cash
      kOSa krvaanaa   cash karvana                 to get someone to cash (+ne)
      kula            kul                          total
      saaO            sau                          hundred
      rhnaa           <rshna>                      to live
      rho             rahe                         lived, are
      hj,aar          hazar                        thousand
      igananaa        ginna (+ne)                  to count
      igana laonaa    gin lena (+ne)               to count (for one’s benefit)
      Qanyavaad       dhanyavad                    thanks



      Notes
      nahIM imala rha milna ‘I cannot find it’
      In the preceding units we came across three important usages
      of the verb imalanaa milna – namely ‘to meet’, ‘to run into’ and ‘to be
      available’. Now observe another use of this verb in the following
      sentence from the dialogue. Also, note its word-for-word translation.

          laoikna Aaja       nahIM        imala   rha.
          lekin aj       nahm mil raha.
          but    today not find ing
          But today (I) cannot find (it). (lit. but today I am not finding it)

      When the verb imalanaa milna is used to express the meaning ‘find’, it
      takes the experiencer subject. If we insert the implied subject in the
      above sentence, the form of the Hindi subject will not be the nom-
      inative maOM mq, but the experiential subject mauJakao mujhko or mauJao mujhe.

          laoikna     Aaja       mauJao           dFtr            nahIM    imala   rha.
          lekin       aj         mujhe            daftar (m.)     nahm     mil     raha.

      Note that the verb does not agree with the subject. Instead it agrees
      with an object, which is dFtr daftar ‘office’ in the above sentence.
      The gender of dFtr daftar is masculine. Did you notice the missing
      element of the verb phrase?
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                                       209


Negation and auxiliary verb deletion

Notice the missing element of the verb in the above sentence.

   laoikna Aaja mauJao            dFtr      nahIM    imala rha      hO.
   lekin     aj      mujhe        daftar nahm mil raha              hs.

The auxiliary verb hO hs can be optionally deleted in negative sen-
tences. Only the auxiliary verbs of the simple present and present
progressive tenses are subject to this optional deletion. Note some
examples:


Positive sentences                   Negative sentences

maOM jaata háU. mq jata ho I go      maOM nahIM jaata hUá. mq nahm jata ho I do not go
                                     maOM nahIM jaata. mq nahm jata I do not go
maOM jaa rha háU. mq ja raha ho      maOM nahIM jaa rha hUá. mq nahm ja raha ho I am not
  I am going                             going
                                     maOM nahIM jaa rha. mq nahm ja raha I am not going
tuma jaatI hao. tum jatc ho          tuma nahIM jaatI hao. tum nahm jatc ho you (f.) do
  you (f.) go                            not go
                                 tuma nahIM jaatI. tum nahm jatc you (f.) do not go
tuma jaa rhI hao. tum ja rahc ho tuma nahIM jaa rhI hao,. tum nahm ja rahc ho you (f.)
  you (f.) are going                     are not going
                                     tuma nahIM jaa rhI. tum nahm ja rahc you (f.) are
                                         not going



Causative verbs
We came across the following related verbs in our earlier dialogues.
Note the slight change in form and meaning.

Verb                          Causative-I            Causative-II

pZ, paRh study, read          pZ,a paRha teach       pZ,vaa paRhva have someone teach
kr kar do                     ——                     krvaa karva have someone do
laga lag seem                 lagaa laga attach      lagavaa lagva cause to be attached

You might already have observed the same base stem in the three
verb forms. For the time being, we will omit the more intricate
210                                       Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      details of verb forms – such as the presence of the two verbs of krnaa
      karna but three forms of the other two verbs – and proceed to the
      fundamental points. At first glance it becomes clear that the verb
      forms in columns two and three share the verb stem in column one,
      adding either the suffix Aa a or vaa va as in

        pZ,  + Aa             = pZ,a
        paRh + a              = paRha cause someone to read, teach
        pZ,  + vaa            = pZ,vaa
        paRh + va             = paRhva to have x to teach y

      The two suffixes Aa -a and vaa -va form the causative verbs. The
      meaning they express can be translated as follows: Aa -a expresses
      ‘make someone do something’, whereas vaa -va means ‘have x make y
      do something’. The English verb ‘teach’ is a causative verb in Hindi,
      but in most cases the causative verbs cannot be translated into Eng-
      lish that easily. Note the following examples:

        maOM     khanaI     pZ,ta                hUá.
        mq kahanc paRhta                         ho.
        I    story     read-pres.                am
        I read a story.

        maOM     jaa^na    kao khanaI        pZ,ata                           hUá.
        mq John ko kahanc paRhata                    ho
        I   John to story        read-caus. a-pres. am
        I make John read a story or I teach John a story

        maMO     jaa^na    kao rama        sao          khanaI    pZ,vaata              hUá.
        mq John ko Ram se kahanc paRhvata                                               ho
        I    John to Ram by story          read-caus. va-pres.                          am
        I have Ram make John read a story.

      Notice that the causative verbs with vaa -va always have an indirect
      agent (e.g. rama sao Ram se ‘by Ram’).
         Did you notice the use of the causative verb in our dialogue? The
      following sentence contains a causative verb.

        mauJao       kuC      TO/valasa           caO@sa         kOSa        krvaanao      hOM.
        mujhe kuch traveller’s cheques cash karvane                 hq.
        me      some traveller’s cheques cash do-caus.va-inf. are
        I need to (have someone) get some traveller’s cheques cashed.
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                             211


In this sentence the indirect agent (by someone) is implied because
of the causative verb with the suffix vaa -va.

laonaa lena as a helping verb
When the cashier hands over the rupees to Philip, he says

   igana     laIijayao
   gin     lcjiye
   count take-imp.
   Please (you) count (for your own benefit).

Had he used the simple verb form instead of the compound verb (i.e.
igainae giniye), the beneficiary of the action of counting would have
remained unspecified. The helping verb lao le indicates the subject as
the beneficiary.


              paRhne ka abhyas 1
pZ,nao ka AByaasa
Reading practice 1    (CD 2; 27)

ek laaok-kqaa ek lok-kathA A folk tale
 1 ek gaaáva maMo caaor jaola sao Baaga gayaa.
   ek gkv mg ek cor jail se bhag gaya.
 2 puilasa vaalaa ]sakao pkD,nao ko ilayao daOD,a.
   pulis (police) vala usko pakaRne ke liye dauRa.
 3 [tnao maoM gaaáva vaalaaoM nao Baagato caaor kao pkD, ilayaa.
   itne mg gkv valõ ne bhagte cor ko pakaR liya.
 4 puilasa vaalaa ja,aor ja,aor sao icallaa rha qaaÊ ‘pkD,a,o mat jaanao dao.’
   pulis vala zor zor se cilla raha tha, ‘pakRo, mat jane do’.
 5 yao saunato hI gaaáva vaalaaoM nao caaor kao CaoD, idyaa.
   ye sunte hc gkv valõ ne cor ko choR diya.
 6 jaba puilasa vaalaa gaaáva vaalaaoM ko pasa phuácaa.
   jab pulis vala gkv valõ ke pas pahjca.
 7 tao ]sakao bahut gaussaa Aayaa.
   to usko bahut gussa aya.
 8 gaussao maoM ]sanao gaaáva vaalaaoM sao pUCa.
   gusse mg usne gkv valõ se pecha,
 9 ‘tumanao caaor kao @yaaoM CaoD, idyaaÆ’
   ‘tumne cor ko kyõ choR diya’
10 gaaáva vaalaaoM nao javaaba idyaaÊ
   gkv valõ ne javab diya,
212                                      Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      11 Aapnao hI kha ‘pkD,ao matÊ jaanao dao.’
         apne hc kaha, ‘pakRo mat, jane do’.

       1 In a (lit. one) village, a thief ran away (i.e. escaped) from jail.
       2 A policeman ran to catch him. (lit. ran for catching)
       3 In the meanwhile the villagers caught the escaping (lit. running)
         thief.
       4 The policeman was screaming very loudly, ‘catch (him), do not let
         (him) go’.
       5 As soon as the villagers heard this, they left the thief.
       6 When the policeman reached the villagers (lit. reached near the
         villagers)
       7 he became very angry.
       8 Angrily (lit. in anger) he asked the villagers (lit. asked from the
         villagers)
       9 ‘Why did you leave the thief ?’ (i.e. why did you let the thief go?)
      10 The villagers answered.
      11 You yourself said, ‘Don’t catch (him); let (him) go.’

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      laaok            lok                                 people
      kqaa             katha (f.)                          story
      laaok-kqaa       lok-katha (f.)                      folk tale
      gaaáva           gkv (m.)                            village
      Baaganaa         bhagna (–ne)                        to run
      Baaga gayaa      bhag gaya (compound verb)           to run away
      puilasa vaalaa   pulis vala (m.)                     policeman
      pkD,naa          pakaRna (+ne)                       to catch
      daOD,naa         dauRna (–ne)                        to run
      [tnao maoM       itne mg                             in the meanwhile
      gaaáva vaalaa    gkv vala (m.)                       villager
      Baagato          bhagte (present participle)         running
      caaor            cor (m.)                            thief
      pkD,naa          pakaRna (+ne)                       to catch
      pkD, ilayaa      pakaR liya (compound verb)          to catch (for one’s benefit)
      ja,aor sao       zor se                              loudly
      icallaanaa       cillana (–ne)                       to scream
      mat              mat                                 not (see notes)
      jaanao dao       jane do (compound verb)             let (someone) go
      saunato hI       sunte hc (sun + te hc participle)   as soon as (someone) heard
      CaoD,naa         choRna (+ne)                        to leave
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                                   213


CaoD, idyaa     choR diya (compound verb)             left (for someone else’s sake)
gaussaa         gussa (m.)                            anger
pUCnaa          pechna (–ne)                          to ask
javaaba         javab (m.)                            answer
javaaba donaa   javab dena (+ne)                      to answer, to reply


Pronunciation
Compare the pronunciation of the stem pkD, pakaR ‘catch’ in the
following three verbal forms. Note the presence of the stem-final
vowel A a in the first two forms and its absence in the third form,
which is written as pkD,ao pakaRo but is pronounced as p@D,ao pakRo.
For further details about when the vowel A a is retained and under
what conditions it is dropped, see Script Unit 4 in this book.

    pakaRne ke liye           pkD,nao ko ilayao in order to catch
    pakaR liya                pkD, ilayaa       caught (for their own benefit)
    pakRo                     pkD,ao            catch!


Notes
Present participle
In the third line we came across the expression

    [tnao           maMo   gaaáva vaalaaoM nao   Baagato     caaor   kao
    itne      mg gkv valõ ne        bhagte  cor                      ko
    this much in village-er (agent) running thief                    to
    pkD,        ilayaa.
    pakaR liya.
    catch took
    In the meantime (lit. in this much (time)), the villagers caught the
    thief.

The phrase bhagte cor ko Baagato caaor kao is in the oblique form of the
simple present participial phrase.

    Baagata                    ( huAa)        caaor
    bhagta                     (hua)          cor
    run + present participle   happened       thief (m. sg.)
    The running thief or The thief who is/was/will be running.
214                                     Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      The composition of the first element is as follows:

          Baaga      + t            +   a
          bhag       + t            +   a
          run        + present      +   masculine singular

      You have probably guessed by now that this is the same form that
      we came across in the formation of the simple present tense. The
      only difference is that the auxiliary verb is absent.
         The second element is the same form as the simple past tense
      form of the verb haonaa hona. Recall the forms huAa hua, hue hue, hu[- M huc
      and hu[- M hum. The last form (i.e. the feminine plural hu[- M hum) does not
      appear in the participial construction. Why? The reason is clarified
      by the explanation that this element is optional and it acts as an
      adjective. So it can easily be omitted in conversation. That is the
      case in our story.
         Now compare the participial form with the present tense verb form.

      Present participle                                      Simple present tense

      Baagata     caaor                                       caaor Baagata   hO
      bhagta cor                                              cor bhagta hs
      The running thief.                                      The thief runs.


      In the present participial form the verb form ceases to function like
      a real verb and begins to behave like an adjective. Therefore, the
      verbal adjectives which are drawn from the simple present tense are
      called ‘present participles’. In other words, they are like adjectives
      ending in Aa -a (i.e. participial adjective), the only difference being
      that they are derived from verbs.
         Like the adjectives ending in Aa -a, these agree in number or
      gender with the following noun. For example:

          Baagata     laD,ka       bhagtA   laRkA      the running boy
          BaagatI     laD,kI       bhagtC   laRkC      the running girl
          Baagato     laD,ko       bhagte   laRke      the running boys
          BaagatI     laD,ikyaaá   bhagtC   laRkiyk    the running girls

      The main function of the present participial clause is to denote
      ‘action in progress’.
         Note that, like adjectives, present participles do not have
      any inherent tense reference to time, as is clear from the English
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                           215


translation. The tense is usually supplied by the main verb form in
the sentence. If in the third line the verb ‘caught’ is changed to the
present or the future tense, the tense reference of the participial form
‘running’ will change to the present or the future correspondingly.
That is why the alternative English translation of Baagata caaor bhagta cor
contains three possible tense references.

Ambiguity and pausing
   pkD,ao      mat            jaanao                    dao.
   pakRo       mat            jane                      do
   catch       not            go-oblique infinitive     give

The translation of the verb phrase jaanao dao jane do is ‘to allow to go’ or
‘to let go’. The familiar imperative form of the verb pkD,naa pakaRna
is pkD,ao pakRo, which means ‘catch’. Depending upon the pause, the
meaning changes. The pause is indicated by the comma.

   pkD,ao  mat, jaanao                           dao.
   pakRo mat, jane                               do
   catch not, go-oblique infinitive              give
   Don’t catch (him); let (him) go.

But the pause is immediately after pkD,ao pakRo; then the negative
particle mat mat negates the second verb, as in

   pkD,aoÊ   mat     jaanao                      dao.
   pakRo, mat jane                               do.
   catch,   not go-oblique infinitive            give
   Catch, don’t let (him) go.

The negative particle mat mat
We encountered two negative particles – nahIM nahm and na na – in the
earlier conversation. The third negative marker mat mat is primarily
restricted to familiar and non-honorific imperatives. In prohibitives,
the use of mat mat is particularly noteworthy.

Word order and contrastive negation
We mentioned earlier that the negative particle is usually placed
before the verb. So usually the Hindi equivalent of the English ‘Do
not catch’ is
216                                                   Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


            mat       pkD,ao .
            mat pakRo
            not catch-imperative (familiar)
            Don’t catch.

      However, the contrastive function is highlighted by the placement
      of the negative particle in the postverbal position (i.e. after the
      verb). This is the reason that mat mat is placed after pkD,ao pakRo in
      the expression

            pkD,ao         matÊ jaanao dao.
            pakRo mat, jane do
            Don’t catch (him); let (him) go.

      The other reading, ‘Catch, do not let (him) go,’ has conjunctive
      rather than contrastive force. Therefore the negative particle
      appears in its normal preverbal position.


                     paRhne ka abhyas 2
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 2
      gaanaa gAnA Song
      Here is a sample of the opening lines of an old Hindi romantic song. In
      the song, the lover is imploring his beloved never to forget him. How-
      ever, the approach is an indirect one (remember the politeness bug!).
      Therefore, rather than asking directly not to forget him, he says:

            yao ratoMÊ yao maaOsamaÊ yao hásanaaÊ hásaanaa
            ye ratg, ye mausam, ye hãsna, hãsana
            mauJao BaUla jaanaaÊ [nhoM na Baulaanaa
            mujhe bhel jana, inhg na bhulana.

            These nights, this weather, this laughter and making (each
            other) laugh,
            (You may) forget me, but never make them forget.

      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      rat                 rat (f.)                               night
      maaOsama            mausam (m.)                            weather
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                           217


hásanaa        hãsna (–ne)                      to laugh
hásaanaa       hãsana (+ne)                     to make someone laugh
BaUlanaa       bhel (–ne)                       to forget
BaUla jaanaa   bhel jana (compound verb)        to forget fully
Baulaanaa      bhulana (+ne)                    to make someone forget



AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1

Match the words or phrases given in the following three columns to
make appropriate Hindi sentences.

    Aa[yao        kI baat @yaa            riKe
    tklaIf        tSarIf                  hO
    Saayad        Aapka [Mtjaar           kama jyaada hao
    vaao          Aja-                    hO
    Aadaba        Aapkao dF,tr maoM       kr rhI qaI
    aiye          kc bat kya              rakhiye
    taklcf        tashrcf                 hs
    shayad        apka intazar            kam zyada ho
    vo            arz                     hs
    adab          apko dafter mg          kar rahc thc.


Exercise 2

Circle the approprate form of the verb in each of the following
sentences:

1   maaf kIijayaoÊ maOM caOk Baojanaa (BaUla ilayaa/BaUla gayaa/BaUla idyaa)
    maf kcjiye, mq cheque bhejna (bhel liya/bhel gaya/bhel diya).
2   maOnao Kanaa (Ka ilayaa/Ka pD,a/Ka idyaa)
    mqne khana (kha liya/kha paRa/kha diya).
3   Aapka bauKar (baZ, ilayaa/baZ, gayaa/baZ, idyaa)
    apka buxar (baRh liya/baRh gaya/baRh diya).
4   Aapnao kuC j,avaaba nahIM (ilayaa/idyaa/Aayaa/gayaa)
    apne kuch javab nahm (liya/diya/aya/gaya).
5   Aap maorI salaah maana (laIijayao/dIijayao/Aa[yao)
    ap merc salah man (lcjiye/dcjiye/aiye).
218                                      Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      Exercise 3
      Which job description matches the job?

      1   AQyaapk                      [maartoM banavaata hO.
          adhyapak                     imaratg banvata hs.
      2 Da^@Tr                         kpDo, banaata hO.
        DakTar (doctor)                kapRe banata hs.
      3 kOiSayar                       Kanaa banaata hO.
        cashier                        khana banata hs.
      4 djaI-                          TIka lagaata hO.
        darzc ‘tailor’                 Tcka lagata hs.
      5 Kanasaamaa                     caOk kOSa krta hO.
        khansama ‘cook’                cheque cash karta hs.
      6 D/a[var                        Ca~aoM kao pZ,ata hO.
        driver                         chatrõ ko paRhata hs.
      7 isaivala [njaIinayar           kar calaata hO.
        civil engineer                 kar calata hs.

      Exercise 4

      Ram and Shyam are brothers. Ram believes in self-help and does
      everything on his own. Shyam, on the other hand, gets someone
      to do his work. Write about Shyam according to the model given
      below:

          rama nao Apnaa kama ikyaa.
          ram ne apana kam kiya.
          Ram did his work.
          Saama nao ihlaDa sao Apnaa kama krvaayaa.
          shyam ne hilda se apna kam karvaya.
          Shyam had Hilda do his work.

      1   rama:       rama nao ApnaI kar calaa[-.
          Syaama:     ____________________________
          Ram:        ram ne apnc kar calac.
          Shyam:      ____________________________
      2   rama:       rama Apnaa Kt ilaKogaa.
          Syaama:     ____________________________
          Ram:        ram apna xat likhega.
          Shyam:      ____________________________
Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed                                            219


3   rama:         rama Apnaa Gar banaa rha hO.
    Syaama:       ____________________________
    Ram:          ram apna ghar bana raha hs.
    Shyam:        ____________________________
4   rama:         rama ApnaI khanaI saunaa rha qaa.
    Syaama:       ____________________________
    Ram:          ram apnc kahanc suna raha tha.
    Shyam:        ____________________________
5   rama:         rama ApnaI laD,kI kao pZ,ata hO.
    Syaama:       ____________________________
    Ram:          ram apnc laRkc ko paRhata hs.
    Shyam:        ____________________________

Exercise 5

Fill out the appropriate present participial form according to the
model given below:

    calanaa:           maMO             calatI     gaaD,I    maoM    caZ,a.
    calna:             mq               caltC      gaRhc     mg      caRha.
    Baaganaa:          maOMnao          Baagato    ku,<ao    kao     doKa.
    bhagna:            mqne             bhagte     kutte     ko      dekha.

1   hásanaa:                     mauJao vaao ————— laD,kI bahut psand hO.
2   Kolanaa:                     ————— baccao bahut saundr laga rho qao.
3   gaanaa:                      —————— icaiD,yaa ]D, rhI qaI.
4   isatar bajaanaa:             —————————— AadmaI bahut AcCa hO.
5   tOrnaa:                      ——————— maCilayaaoM kao doKao.
6   raonaa:                      Da^@Tr nao ——————— baccao kao TIka lagaayaa.
1   hãsna:                       mujhe vo _________ laRkc bahut pasand hs.
2   khelna:                      ___________ bacce bahut sundar lag rahe the.
3   gana:                        ______________ ciRiya uR rahc thc.
4   sitar bajana:                ________________ admc bahut accha hs.
5   tsrna:                       __________________ machaliyõ ko dekho.
6   rona:                        DakTar ne ________ bacce ko Tcka lagaya.
220                                      Unit 8: I need to get cheques cashed


      Exercise 6

      Pac-Man has attacked the following text and, some elements have
      been chewed up. Your task is to supply the postpositions or the
      missing parts of the verb in those places where Pac-Man has left
      three bullets behind.

        maOM rolavao sToSana pr Apnao daost • • • [Mtja,ar kr rha qaa. qaaoD,I dor baad gaaD,I AayaI
        AaOr maora daost gaaD,I sao ]tra. hma bahut KuSa hao kr imalao. [sa baar paáca saala ko baad
        hmaarI maulaakat • • •. qaaoD,I dor baad maOMnao khaÊ ‘[sa baar bahut dor ko baad yahaá Aayao
        hao’.]sanao javaaba • • •Ê AcCI baat qaI ik Agar gaaD,I dor sao na • • •Ê tao maOM Aaja BaI
        na • • •.
        mq railway station par apne dost • • • intzar kar raha tha. thoRc
        der bad gaRc ayc aur mera dost gaRc se utra. ham bahut xush
        ho kar mile. is bar pkc skl ke bad hamarc mulakat • • •. thoRc
        der bad mqne kaha, ‘is bar bahut der ke bad yahk aye ho.’ usne
        javab • • •, ‘acchc bat thc ki agar gaRc der se na • • •, to mq aj
        bhc na • • •.
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                            221




9 facaU-na kukI maoM @yaa ilaKa hOÆ
  ‘fortune cookies’
  mg kya likha hs?
       What’s written in the fortune cookie?




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   use past participials
  •   understand how to say ‘no’ in socially sensitive situations
  •   use the participial forms as adverbials
  •   use the construction ‘neither . . . nor’
  •   understand hidden assumptions
  •   form purpose clauses
  •   learn more about Indian and Chinese food (particularly curries).
  •   use the passive construction
  •   understand more on reduplication
  •   use idiomatic expressions
222                           Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


                     paRhne ka abhyas 1
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 1     (CD 2; 28)

      jaldI pOsaa Aanao vaalaa hO. jaldC pssA Ane vAlA hs
      Money will come soon

      saInaÁ AmarIka maoM ek caInaI rOsTaorOnT
      Scene: Chinese restaurant in the US

      1   ek idna dao daost Kanaa Kanao ek caInaI rOsTaorOnT gayao.
          ek din do dost khana khane ek ccnc restaurant gaye.
      2   Kanao ko baad baOra ‘faca-Una kukIja,’ laayaa.
          khane ke bad bsra ‘fortune cookies’ laya.
      3   daonaaoM nao ApnaI–ApnaI ‘faca-Una kukI’ kao Kaolaa AaOr ApnaI–ApnaI iksmat ko baaro maoM
          pZ,a.
          donõ ne apnc-apnc ‘fortune cookie’ ko khola aur apnc-apnc kismat
          ke bare mg paRha.
      4   ifr ek daost nao dUsaro sao pUCaÊ ‘kagaja, pr @yaa ilaKa hOÆ’
          phir ek dost ne desre se pecha, ‘kagaz par kya likha hs?’
      5   ilaKa hO – ‘jaldI pOsaa Aanao vaalaa hO.’
          likha hs – ‘jaldc pssa ane vala hs.’
      6   yah tao baD,I KuSaI kI baat hO.
          ye to baRc xushc kc bat hs.
      7   tao kao[- laaTrI KrIdI hOÆ
          to koc laTrc (Lottery) xarcdc hs?
      8   nahIMÊ laoikna kla Apnaa jaIvana baImaa krvaayaa hO.
          nahm, lekin kal apna jcvan bcma karvaya hs.

      1 One day two friends went to eat in a Chinese restaurant.
      2 After eating (i.e. after they had finished eating), the waiter brought
        (them) fortune cookies.
      3 (They) both opened their fortune cookie(s) and read about their
        fortune(s).
      4 Then one friend asked the other, ‘What is written on the paper?’
      5 (It) is written – ‘Money is about to come soon.’
      6 This is a matter of great happiness.
      7 Did (you) buy a lottery ticket?
      8 No, but yesterday, I bought life-insurance. (lit. I have caused the
        life insurance to be done)
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                     223


SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
daost                        dost (m.)          friend
Kanaa                        khana (m.)         food
Kanaa                        khana (+ne)        to eat
Kanao (ko ilayao)            khane (ke liye)    (in order) to eat
caIna                        ccn                China
caInaI                       ccnc               Chinese
baOra                        bsra (m.)          waiter
laanaa                       lana (–ne)         to bring
daonaaoM                     donõ               both
Kaolanaa                     kholna (+ne)       to open
iksmat                       kismat (f.)        fortune, fate
kagaj,a                      kagaz (m.)         paper
ilaKnaa                      likhna (+ne)       to write
ilaKa hO                     likha hs           is written
jaldI                        jaldc              quickly, hurry
pOsaa                        pssa (m.)          money; one hundredth of a rupee
Aanao vaalaa                 ane vala           about to come
jaIvana                      jcvan (m.)         life
baImaa                       bcma (m.)          insurance



Notes

Cultural

Chinese food in India has a distinct Indian (spicy) taste and is very
popular. However, Chinese restaurants in India don’t usually offer
fortune cookies.


Purpose clauses and deletion

In the last chapter, we came across the following expression:

    puilasa         vaalaa           ]sakao pkD,nao         ko ilayao   daOD,a.
    pulis   vala     usko pakaRne    ke liye                            dauRa.
    police one/man him to catch-obl. for                                ran
    The policeman ran to catch him.
224                                Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      Now compare this Hindi expression with the opening line:

         ek           idna   dao      daost     Kanaa   Kanao      ek         caInaI
         ek           din do  dost    khana             khane       ek        ccnc
         one          day two friends food              to eat-obl. one       Chinese
         rOsTaorOnT          gayao.
         restaurant gaye.
         restaurant went
         One day two friends went to a Chinese restaurant to eat food.

      You must have observed by now that the underlined infinitive phrases
      in English, such as ‘to catch’ and ‘to eat’, are not translated as
      plain infinitives like pkD,naa pakaRna and Kanaa khana. The plain (sim-
      ple) infinite phrase will yield an ungrammatical sentence in Hindi.
      As is clear from the Hindi expression pkD,nao ko ilae pakaRne ke liye ‘to
      catch’, the Hindi equivalent of the English purpose clause ‘to catch’
      is paraphrased as ‘in order to catch’, and therefore the postposition
      ko ilae ke liye ‘for, in order to’ follows the infinitive phrase pkD,naa
      pakaRna. Recall the peer pressure influence of the postposition on
      the noun that makes the noun oblique and, thus, pkD,naa pakaRna
      changes to pkD,nao pakaRne. The postposition can be described as the
      ghost postposition – ko ilae ke liye.
         What determines the retention or deletion of the postposition in
      purpose clauses such as those discussed here? The answer lies in the
      main verb of each sentence, i.e. daOD,a dauRa ‘ran’ and gae gaye ‘went’.
      If the main verb is a motion verb, it is possible optionally to drop
      the postposition as Kanao khane. Similarly, it is possible to drop ko ilae
      ke liye in the first sentence:

         puilasa                      vaalaa   ]sakao   pkD,nao     daOD,a.
         pulis (police)               vala     usko     pakaRne     dauRa.

      If we replace the main verb in the above sentence with a stative
      (non-motion) verb, the postposition must be retained, as in

         puilasa vaalaa ]sakao pkD,nao ko ilayao          hO.
         pulis vala usko pakaRne ke liye hs.
         The police are (there) to catch him.

      The deletion of the postposition is ungrammatical; therefore, the
      following sentence is unacceptable:

         puilasa                      vaalaa   ]sakao   pkD,nao     hO.
         pulis (police)               vala     usko     pakaRne     hs.
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                           225


Reduplication and distributive meaning
In Unit 4, we demonstrated that repetition expresses intensity. In
sentence 3 the feminine form of the reflexive pronoun Apnaa apna is
repeated:

   daonaaoM nao      ApnaI–ApnaI ‘facaUna- kukI’           kao   Kaolaa.
   donõ ne    apnc-apnc ‘fortune cookie’ ko                      khola
   both-agent self self    fortune cookie obj.                   opened
   Both opened their fortune cookie(s).

ApnaI apnc is repeated to convey that both opened their respective
cookies.

Past participle (expressing states): adjectival and
adverbial use
In Unit 8 we introduced present participles. Compare the phrase
Baagato caaor kao bhagte cor ko ‘the running thief’ with Baagao caaor kao bhage cor
ko. The latter form is called the past participial form and can be
translated into English as ‘the escaped thief’.
    Now compare the present forms with their corresponding past
participial forms, and the difference in meaning rendered by the two
forms:

Present participle                            Past participle

Baagata caaor bhagta cor the running thief Baagaa caaor bhaga cor the escaped thief
baaolatI laD,kI boltc laRkc the speaking girl baaolaI baat bolc bat the spoken matter
ilaKto laD,ko likhte laRke the writing boys ilaKo Sabd likhe shabda the written
(boys who are/were/will be writing)                words


Note the composition of the past participial form:

Stem                                  +              past participial marker

Baaga bhag run                        +              Aa a past-masculine singular
baaola bol speak                      +              [- c past-feminine singular
ilaK likh write                       +              e e past-masculine plural

You have probably guessed by now that the past participle is the
same form that we came across in the simple past tense formation.
226                        Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      The only difference is that the feminine singular form is used for
      both singular and plural forms.
          The second element (optional) remains the same in both the present
      and past participial forms, i.e. huAa hua, hue hue and hu[- huc.
          As stated earlier, in the participle the verb form ceases to func-
      tion like a real verb and begins to behave like an adjective, so the
      verbal adjectives which are drawn from the simple past tense are
      called ‘past participles’. In other words, they are like adjectives end-
      ing in Aa a with the difference being that they are derived from verbs.
          Like the adjectives ending in Aa a, they agree in number or gender
      with the following noun. Note the gender number agreement in the
      above examples.
          Unlike the present participle which denotes ‘action in progress’,
      the past participle indicates a state.
          Note the difference in meaning between the present participle and
      its corresponding past participial form:

      Present participle                              Past participle

      baOzta laD,ka bsThta laRka                      baOza laD,ka bsTha laRka
      The boy who is (in the process of ) sitting.    The seated boy.
      saaotI laD,ikyaaá sotc laRkiyk                  saao[- laD,ikyaaá soc laRkiyk
      The girls who are in the process of sleeping.   The sleeping girls. (state)

      The present participial form saaotI sotc indicates the dozing off stage
      prior to sound sleep whereas the corresponding past participle
      indicates the state of sound sleep.

      Adverbials
      So far we have discussed the adjectival use of participles. Participial
      forms when placed before a verb mark adverbial usage. Note the
      translation of the quoted sentence given in sentence 4 of the reading
      passage.

         kagaja,   pr      @yaa    ilaKa   hOÆ
         kagaz par kya       likha     hs?
         paper on what written is
         What is written on the paper?

      Superficially it appears as if ilaKa hO likha hs is the present per-
      fect form of the verb ilaK likh, which should be translated as ‘has
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                                   227


written’, but this is not the case. The main verb is hO hs, while ilaKa
likha is the past participial form used as an adverb without the
optional element huAa hua. In short,

    ilaKa hO. = ilaKa (huAa) hO.
    likha hs = likha (hua) hs

Since the main verb is hO hs and ilaKa likha is the past participle, the
translation is ‘is written’ rather than ‘has written’. The insertion of
the optional element disambiguates it from the present perfect form
of the verb ilaK likh. In passing, it should be mentioned that the verb
phrase in sentence 7 of the passage K,rIdI xarcdc hs is a real present
perfect form of the verb K,rId xarcd ‘buy’; therefore, its literal trans-
lation is ‘has bought’.


baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 1                                  (CD 2; 29)

maora poT Bar gayaa hO. merA peT bhar gayA hs
I am full
Bill Hassett and his wife, who are visiting India for the first time, are
invited to dinner by Bill’s Indian partner. Bill’s partner’s wife, Jyotsna
Singh, asks her guests about the type of food they would prefer. Bill
suggests to his wife ‘Honey, as is said in English: “Spice up your life.”
Why don’t we both spice up our lives in the literal sense and try some
spicy food?’ So, with the intention of enjoying spicy food, he tells
Jyotsna Singh:

ibalaÁ         ihndustanaI ‘krI’ ABaI tk hmanao nahIM KayaI.
Bill:          hindustanc curry abhc tak hamne nahm khayc.
jyaao%sanaaÁ   Aapkao masaalaodar Kanaa psand hO yaa ‘krI’Æ
Jyotsna: apko masaledar khana pasand hs ya curry?
ibalaÁ         daonaaoM maoM f,k- @yaa hOÆ
Bill:          donõ mg farka kya hs?
jyaao%sanaaÁ   AmarIka maMo krI ek iDSa ka naama hO laoikna ihndustana maoM eosaI baat nahIM.
Jyotsna: amrcka mg curry ek dish ka nam hs lekin hindustan mg
         ssc bat nahm.
ibalaÁ         hmaaro yahaá ‘krI’ ka matlaba kao[- masaalaodar ihndustanaI iDSa hO.
Bill:          hamare yahk curry ka matlab ‘koc masaledar hindustanc
               dish’ hs.
228                          Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      jyaao%sanaaÁ   ihndustana maoM na tao ‘krI’ hmaoSaa masaalaodar haotI hO AaOr na hI ‘krI pa]Dr’
                     A@sar ibakta hO. ‘krI’ Aksar trI vaalaI haotI hO AaOr maaásaÊ sabjaIÊ
                     maClaI yaa fla kI banaI haotI hO.
      Jyotsna: hindustan mg na to curry hamesha masaledar hotc hs aur
               na hc hindustan mg curry powder aksar bikta hs. curry
               aksar tarc valc hotc hs aur ye mks, sabzc, macchlc ya phal
               kc banc hotc hs.
      ibalaÁ         AroÑ ibanaa masaalao kI krI. yah tao hmanao kBaI nahIM saunaa qaa.
      Bill:          are! bina masale kc curry. ye to hamne kabhc nahm suna tha.
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   tao Aba Aapkao kaOna saI krI psand hOÆ
      Jyotsna: to ab apko kaun sc curry pasand hs?
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   Aama ko Aama AaOr gauzilayaaoM ko dama. ‘krI’ ko baaro maoM pta laga gayaa AaOr
                     AsalaI ‘krI’ caKnao ka maaOka BaI imala jaayaogaa. AcCaÊ hmakao toj,a
                     masaalaodar maaása kI ‘krI’ bahut psand hO.
      Bill:       am ke am aur guThlcyõ ke dam. curry ke bare mg pata
                  lag gaya aur aslc curry cakhne ka mauka bhc mil jayega.
                  accha, hamko tez masaledar mks kc curry bahut pasand hs.
      (They laugh at the unexpected turn of the conversation; the proverb has
      added a lighter touch to the conversation and they continue to talk . . . )
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   AroÊ baat hI kroMgao yaa kuC snaO@sa BaI KayMaoMgao.
      Jyotsna: are, bat hc kargga ya kuch snsks bhi khaygge
      (Even after Bill has eaten a couple of snacks, and he is full, she insists
      on giving him more. Bill puts his hands over his plate.)
      ibalaÁ         basaÊ AaOr nahIM Ka sakUágaa. maora poT Bar gayaa hO.
      Bill:          bas, aur nahm kha sakoga, mera peT bhar gaya hai.
      ibalaÁ         basaÊ AaOr ibalkula nahIM. bahut Ka ilayaa hO. nahIM tao baImaar hao jaa}ágaa.
      Bill:          bas, aur bilkul nahm. bahut kha liya hai. nahm to bimar ho
                     jaoga.

      Bill:    So far, in India, we have not eaten curry.
      Jyotsna: Do you like spicy food or curry?
      Bill:    What is the difference between the two?
      Jyotsna: In America, curry is the name of a dish but this is not the
               case in India.
      Bill:    In our place (i.e. in America) curry is (called) a spicy
               Indian dish.
      Jyotsna: In India, curry is not always spicy nor is curry powder
               usually sold (commercially). Curry is usually liquified and
               (it) is made of meat, vegetables, fish or fruit.
      Bill:    Wow! Curry without spices. This we have (lit. had) never
               heard of (before).
      Jyotsna: So, which curry do you like?
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                            229


Bill:        (This is like) earth and heaven’s joy combined. (Now) I
             have came to know about curry and will get an opportunity
             to taste a genuine curry. Well, we very much like the very
             spicy meat curry.
(They laugh at the unexpected turn of the conversation; the proverb
has added a lighter touch to the conversation and they continue to
talk . . . )
Jyotsna: Hey, would you (like to) continue to talk or eat some
             (more) snacks?
(Even after Bill has eaten a couple of snacks, and he is full, she
insists on giving him more. Bill puts his hands over his plate.)
Bill:        Enough. (I) won’t be able to eat more.
Bill:        Enough, absolutely no more, otherwise I will get sick.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
krI,ÀkZ,I                     curry (f.)           curry (*see Notes)
masaalaa                      masala (m.)          spice
masaalaodar                   masaledar (adj.)     spicy
yaa                           ya                   or
fk-                           farka (m.)           difference
hmaaro yahaá                  hamare yahk          at our place (house, country, etc.)
na . . . na                   na . . . na          neither . . . nor
matlaba                       matlab (m.)          meaning
hmaoSaa                       hamesha              always
Aksar                         aksar                often, usually
tr                            tar                  wet
trI                           tarc (f.)            liquid
maaása                        mks (m.)             meat
sabjaI                        sabzc (f.)           vegetable
maClaI                        macchlc (f.)         fish
fla                           phal (m.)            fruit
bananaa                       banna (–ne)          to be made
banaI                         banc                 made
ibanaa                        bina                 without
kBaI                          kabhc                ever
kBaI nahIM                    kabhc nahm           never
Aama                          am (m. adj.)         mango (n.); common (adj.)
gauzlaI                       guThlc (f.)          stone (of a fruit)
dama                          dam (m.)             price
Aama ko Aama AaOr . . .       am ke am aur . . .   earth’s joy and heaven’s
       gauzilayaaoM ko dama     guThilyõ ke dam       combined
230                      Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      pta lagaanaa           pata lagana (+ko)   to come to know
      AsalaI                 aslc                real, genuine
      caKnaa                 cakhna (+ne)        to taste
      maaOka                 mauka (m.)          opportunity
      toja,                  tez                 fast, quick, sharp, strong
      snaO@sa                snsks (m.)          snacks
      basa                   bas                 enough
      saknaa                 sakna               to be able to, can
      Kanaa                  khana               food, to eat


      Pronunciation
      The English word ‘curry’ is a derivative of the Hindi word kZ,I kaRh c.
      Note the presence of the retroflex Z, Rh in the Hindi word.


      Notes
      Eating etiquette: how to say ‘no’
      Indians are very hospitable. One of the expressions of their hospital-
      ity is to insist on giving more food to their guests. This results in
      one of the most embarrassing situations that guests can encounter.
      In addition to the linguistic strategies given in the dialogue, here
      are some other important expressions to refuse food. Don’t keep on
      eating more!

          Aapnao tao phlao      hI bahut    do   idyaa   hO.
          apne to pshle hc bahut de diya hs
          You have already given so much food.

          Kanaa tao bahut AcCa hO, laoikna maorI tibayat zIk nahIM hO.
          khana to bahut accha hs, lekin merc tabiyat Thck nahm hs.
          The food is very good, but I am not feeling well.

      Curry powder/curry
      In the authentic Indian tradition, the English word ‘curry’ simply
      does not exist. It is part of the vocabulary of English-educated
      bilinguals. The Hindi word kZ,I kaRhi is restricted to a vegetarian
      curry which is made out from chick-pea flour. The chances are
      Hindi speakers will not use the term ‘curry’ to refer to the dishes
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                                 231


mentioned in the dialogue, so, do not be surprised if this term is not
understood in the native Indian context. Indians will express this
concept by specifying the degree of spiciness and by qualifying a
dish with words such as trI vaalaI sabjaI tarc valc sabzc or trI vaalaa maaása/gaaoSt
tarc vala mas/goshta. Curry is actually a blend of ground herbs and
spices adapted by British settlers in India from the traditional spice
mixtures of Indian cuisine. The basic ingredients of commercial curry
powder are turmeric (which imparts the characteristic yellow colour),
cumin, coriander, and cayenne pepper. Curry powder is primarily
targeted at foreign consumption. English ‘curry’ is said to be derived
from Tamil ‘kari’.

Focus and word order
The normal word order of the opening sentence of the above dia-
logue is as follows:
   hmanao        ihndustanaI        ‘krI’   ABaI tk       nahIM        KayaI.
   hamne    hindustanc curry abhc tak                     nahm khayc.
   we-agent Indian       curry yet                        not ate
   We have not eaten Indian curry yet.
The two elements of the above sentence – time adverb and object –
are placed in the sentence in the initial position as they are being
singled out for emphasis.
   ihndustanaI      ‘krI’        ABaI tk hmanao           nahIM        KayaI.
   hindustanc curry abhc tak hamne           nahm khayc.
   Indian        curry yet         we-agent not ate
   As yet, it is the Indian curry (that) we have not eaten.

‘Neither . . . nor’ na . . . na na . . . na and emphatic
particles
Note the use of the emphatic particles with na . . . na na . . . na
‘neither . . . nor’. Also, observe the placement of the phrase ihndustana maoM
hindestan mg in the ‘neither . . . nor’ clause:
   ihndustana     maoM      na     tao            ‘krI’      hmaoSaa            masaalaodar
   hindustan      mg na            to         curry hamesha                     masaledar
   India          in not           emp. part. curry always                      spicy
   haotI          hO
   hotc       hs
   be-present is (aux.)
232                                Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


        AaOr     na        hI                ihndustana             maoM     krI pa]Dr              Aksar
        aur na             hc                hindustan              mg currypowder                  aksar
        and not            emp. part         India                  in curry powder                 often
        ibakta                      hO.
        bikta         hs.
        be sold-pres. is
        As regards curry in India, it is neither always spicy nor is curry
        powder often sold in India.

      The emphatic particles tao to and hI hc are more intimately tied to
      curry and curry powder, respectively, as shown:

        ihndustana         maoM        na   krI             tao                  hmaoSaa        masaalaodar
        hindustan          mg na            curry to         hamesha                            masaledar
        India              in not           curry emp. part. always                             spicy
        haotI                 hO
        hotc       hs
        be-present is (aux.)

        AaOr     na        ihndustana       maoM        krI             pa]Dr         hI                Aksar
        aur na             hindustan        mg curry powder hc                                          aksar
        and not            India            in curry powder emp. part.                                  often
        ibakta                      hO.
        bikta                       hs.
        be sold-pres.               is

      The movement of the emphatic particles from their original position
      after the negative particle na na renders the emphatic counterpart of
      the normal na . . . na na . . . na ‘neither . . . nor’ construction.


      Past participle: adverbial

      The verb haotI hO hotc hs is the generic construction explained in Unit
      4. Can you find the past participle in the following sentence?

        yao      maaása           sabjaI           maClaI         yaa      fla       kI banaI
        ye       mks              sabzc,    macchlc               ya phal kc               banc
        this     meat             vegetable fish                  or fruit of              make-past. ppl.
        haotI             hO.
        hotc     hs.
        be-pres. is (aux.)
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                                  233


Yes, banaI banc is the past participial form of the verb bananaa banna ‘to be
made.’ It can be followed by the optional element hu[- huc. However,
in the following sentence

   hmanao           kBaI    nahIM   saunaa          qaa.
   hamne     kabhc nahm suna                        tha.
   We-agent ever not heard                          was
   We had never heard of (it).

saunaa suna is not a past participle. In combination with the auxiliary
qaa tha, it renders the past perfect form of the verb saunanaa sunna ‘to
hear/listen to’.

Compound verbs with jaanaa jana ‘to go’
As explained in Unit 7, the helping verb jaanaa jana expresses ‘trans-
formation’ and/or ‘finality or completeness’. Both semantic shades
are reflected in the following conjunct sentence:

   krI      ko baaro maoM    pta             laga          gayaa   AaOr AsalaI       krI
   curry ke bare mg pata    lag    gaya aur aslc    curry
   curry about      address strike went and genuine curry

   caKnao     ka maaOka                 BaI         imala jaayaogaa.
   cakhne     ka mauka                  bhc  mil jayega
   taste      of opportunity            also get go-will

The verbs pta laganaa pata lagna ‘to come to know’ and milna imalanaa ‘to
get’ are subjected to the compound verb construction, and the help-
ing verb jaanaa jana ‘to go’ loses its literal meaning.

The ‘opportunity to . . .’ x ka maaOka imalanaa
x ka mauka milna
Note the word-for-word translation of the English expression, ‘we
will get the chance to taste the genuine curry’.

   hmakao     AsalaI        krI     caKnao          ka maaOka               imala jaayaogaa.
   hamko aslc    curry cakhne ka mauka       mil jayega
   we-to genuine curry taste  of opportunity get go-will

The expression ‘to get the opportunity to do x’ requires the experi-
ential subject; therefore, the subject hma ham ‘we’ is followed by
the postposition kao ko. Since the Hindi verb never agrees with the
234                          Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      subject that is followed by a postposition, the verb in the above
      sentence agrees with maaOka mauka ‘opportunity’, which is masculine
      singular. Also, the genitive ka ka agrees with maaOka mauka.


      baatcaIt batcct Dialogue 2       (CD 2; 30)

      AagaÑAagaÑ Ag! Ag! ‘Fire! Fire!’
      The next week, Mr and Mrs Bill Hassett come to the Singhs’ residence
      for dinner. They converse with each other on a wide variety of sub-
      jects. Finally, the delicious smell of the food begins to overpower their
      conversation. In the meanwhile, the hostess announces that the dinner
      is served.
      ibalaÁ         vaahÑ vaahÑ Saanadar KuSabaU Aa rhI hOÊ AaOr [ntja,ar krnaa mauiSkla hO.
      Bill:          vah! vah! shandar xushbe a rahc hs, aur intazar karna
                     mushkil hs.
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   Aa[yaoÊ tao Kanaa Sauà ikyaa jaae. yah hO AapkI psand – toja, imaca- vaalaI
                     icakna krI.
      Jyotsna: aiye, to khana shuru kiya jaye. ye hs, apkc pasand – tez
                  mirca valc chicken curry.
      (Bill takes a lot of curry while Mrs Hassett takes only a little bit.
      After taking the first substantial bite)
      ibalaÁ         AaohhhÑ AagaÑ AagaÑ
      Bill:          (fanning his mouth) Ohhh . . . ag! . . . ag!
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   @yaaoM @yaa huAaÆ
      Jyotsna: kyõ kya hua?
      ibalaÁ         yao tao ‘krI’ nahIM hOÑ yah tao jvaalaamauKI hOÑ Ñ AaOr maOM Apnaa Aaga bauJaanao
                     ka saamaana BaI nahIM laayaa.
      Bill:          ye to curry nahm hs! ye to jwalamukhc hs!! aur mq apna ag
                     bujhane ka saman bhc nahm laya.
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   Aaga bauJaanao ka saamaana yah hO – Agar bahut imaca- laga rhI hO tao dhI
                     laIijae.
      Jyotsna: ag bujhane ka saman ye hs – agar bahut mirca lag rahc hs
                 to dahc lcjiye.
      (After a while Bill’s mouth cools down)
      ibalaÁ         sacaÊ AmarIka maMo toja, masaalaodar Kanaa [tnaa toja, nahIM haota.
      Bill:          sac, amrcka (America) mg tez masaledar khana itna tez
                     nahm hota.
      jyaao%sanaaÁ   haá,Ê yah tao ihndustana hO.yahaá ‘toj,a’ ka matlaba ‘bahut toja,’ hO. hma laaoga
                     bahut toja, Kato hOM laoikna ihndustana maoM saba laaoga [tnaa ‘toja,’ nahIM Ka
                     sakto.
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                                  235


Jyotsna: hk, ye to hindustan hs. yahk ‘tez’ ka matlab ‘bahut tez’
         hs. ham log bahut tez khate hq lekin hindustan mg sab
         log itna tez khana nahm kha sakte.
ibalaÁ          galat–f,hmaI dUr krnao ko ilayao Sauik`yaa. maOM Aba samaJa gayaa ik ‘toja,’
                Ktrnaak Sabd hO.
Bill:           galat-fahamc der karne ke liye shukriya. mq ab samajh
                gaya ki ‘tez’ xatarnak shabda hs.
Bill:       Wow! Wow! the splendid fragrance (of food) is coming;
            (it) is difficult to wait any longer (i.e. I cannot wait more).
Jyotsna: Please come, let’s start eating (lit. eating should be started).
            This is your favourite – hot chicken curry (lit. sharp pepper
            one chicken curry).
(Bill takes a lot of curry while Mrs Hassett takes a little bit. After
taking the first substantial bite)
Bill:       (fanning his mouth) Oh . . . h . . . h! Fire! Fire!
Jyotsna: Why? What happened?
Bill:       This is not curry! This is a volcano!! And I did not bring
            my fire extinguisher.
Jyotsna: This is (your) fire extinguisher – if (it) is very hot, then
            take some yoghurt. (lit. if very much pepper striking (you)).
(After a while Bill’s mouth cools down.)
Bill:       Truly, in the US the spicy food is not so spicy.
Jyotsna: Yes, this is India. Here ‘hot’ means ‘very hot.’ We eat very
            hot food, but not all people can eat such hot (food) in India.
Bill:       Thanks for dispelling (my) misconception. Now I (fully)
            understand that ‘tez’ is a dangerous word.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
vaahÑ vaahÑ              vah! vah!             Wow! Wow! bravo!
Saanadar                 shandar               grand, splendid
KuSabaU                  xushbe (f.)           fragrance (lit. happy smell)
Sauà krnaa               shuru karna (+ne)     to begin
Sauà ikyaa jaae/jaayao   shuru kiya jaye       should be started
imaca-                   mirca (f.)            chilli peppers
Aao                      oh                    exclamation of pain/sorrow
Aaga                     ag (f.)               fire
jvaalaamauKI             jwalamukhc (m.)       volcano
bauJaanaa                bujhana (+ne)         to extinguish
saamaana                 saman (m.)            baggage, goods, stuff, tools
laanaa                   lana (–ne)            to bring
dhI                      dahc (m./f.)          yoghurt
236                              Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      saca                       sac (m.)                  truth, true
      [tnaa                      <itna>                    this/so much/many
      galat                      galat                     wrong
      galatf,hmaI                galat-fahamc (f.)         misconception, misunderstanding
      dUr                        der                       far, distant
      dUr krnaa                  der karna (+ne)           to dispel, to eliminate
      K,%ara                     <xatra> (m.)              danger
      K,%arnaak                  xatarnak                  dangerous
      Sabd                       shabda (m.)               word


      Pronunciation
      Words such as xatra and itna are written as K,tra xatara and [tnaa
      itana, respectively. The omitted vowel of K,tra xatra surfaces in K,trnaak
      xatarnak.


      Notes
      Ambiguity
      The following expression from the opening line of Dialogue 2 is
      ambiguous:

          AaOr      [Mtjaar       krnaa      mauiSkla       hO.
          aur intazar karna mushkil hs.
          and wait           to do difficult is
          (It) is difficult to wait any longer or And, (it) is difficult to wait.

      In other words, AaOr aur can be interpreted either as a conjunction
      marker or as a modifier of [Mtjaar/[ntjaar intazar.

      Passive construction
      The English expression ‘Let’s begin eating’ is paraphrased as ‘Eating
      should be done.’

          Kanaa           Sauà            ikyaa         jaae/jaayao.
          khana           shuru           kiya          jaye.
          eating          begin           did           go-subjunctive

      The verb phrase is in the passive subjunctive form. The passive
      construction in Hindi takes a compound verb construction in the
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                           237


sense that it involves a main verb and the helping verb. The only
difference is that the main verb, rather than being in a stem form, is
in the past form.

Passive
Main verb                  Helping verb
(past form)                (jaanaa jAnA + tense)

ikyaa kiya                 jaae/jaayao       jaye                should be done
pZ,a paRha                 jaata hO          jata hs             is read
pZ,a paRha                 gayaa             gaya                was read
pZ,a paRha                 jaaegaa/jaayaogaa jayega              will be read
baaolaa bola               jaa rha hO ja raha hs                 is being spoken/told

In other words, the passive is formed by using the main verb in the
past form. The helping verb is always jaanaa jana ‘to go’, which under-
goes tense conjugation like any other helping verb in a compound
verb construction.
   Like English passive subjects, which are appended with ‘by’, Hindi
passive subjects are attached to the postposition sao se ‘from, by’.
Here is the list of pronominal forms with the postposition sao se:
   maOM + sao = mauJasao                       hma + sao = hmasao
   mq + se = mujhse          by me             ham + se = hamse          by us
   tU + sao = tuJasao                          tuma + sao = tumasao
   te + se = tujhse          by you            tum + se = tum se         by you
                                               Aap + sao = Aapsao
                                               ap + se = apse            by you
                                                                         (honorific)
   vah + sao = ]sasao                          vao     + sao = ]nasao
   vo + se = usse            by him/her        ve      + se = unse       by them
Since the passive subject is always followed by the postposition sao se,
the passive verb can never agree with it; instead it agrees with the
object, as in
   mauJasao    iktaba        pZI,                    ga[-/gayaI.
   mujhse kitab     paRhc                            gayc.
   me-by book (f.) read-past-f. sg.                  passive-go + past-f. sg.
   The book was read by me.
If the feminine object iktaba kitab ‘book’ is replaced by the masculine
object K,t xat ‘letter’, the passive verb form will be in the masculine
singular form.
238                              Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


        mauJasao    Kt                     pZ,a                         gayaa.
        mujhse xat           paRha                                      gaya.
        me-by letter (m.) read-past-m. sg.                              passive-go + past-f. sg.
        The letter was read by me.
      One important difference between Hindi and English is that both
      transitive and intransitive verbs can be passivized in Hindi, while
      only transitive verbs can be passivized in English. See the Grammar
      section for more details.

      Omitted subject
        Agar       (Aapkao)        bahut          imaca-         laga      rhI   hO   tao    (Aap)
        agar       (ap-ko)         bahut          mirca  lag    rahc hs               to   (ap)
        If         (you-to)        very           pepper strike ing is                then (you)
        kuC        dhI             laIijayao.
        kuch dahc    lcjiye.
        some yoghurt take

      The omitted subject of the first clause is experiential while it is
      simple nominative in the second clause.

      The past participle and the passive construction
      You must have discovered by now that there is no neat correspond-
      ence between the English and Hindi passives. The English passive
      construction can be paraphrased in one of the following three ways.
      First, those instances where English and Hindi both use the passive
      construction to express the target idea. For example, English expres-
      sions such as ‘it is said’ and ‘it is heard’ are translated by means of
      the Hindi passive, as in:

        kha              jaata                             hO.
        kaha        jata                                   hs.
        say-past passive-go-present                        is
        (It) is said.
        saunaa            jaata                             hO.
        suna         jata                                   hs.
        hear-past passive-go-present                        is
        (It) is heard.

      As mentioned in Unit 2, Hindi is a ‘pro-drop’ language and the
      English dummy ‘it’ is not translated.
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                239


   Second, English passives are sometimes translated as past parti-
cipial forms in Hindi. Consider sentence 4 in Reading practice 1 at
the start of this chapter:

   kagaja,     pr       @yaa       ilaKa          hOÆ
   kagaz par kya       likha                      hs?
   paper on what written (past. ppl.)             is
   What is written on the paper?

Compare the English sentence with its corresponding Hindi sentence.
The Hindi sentence does not use the passive construction. Instead,
the past participial form of the verb ilaKnaa likhna is used in the cor-
responding Hindi sentence.
   Third, Hindi intransitive verbs are translated as passive in English.


Intransitive                                       Transitive

ibaknaa bikna to be sold                           baocanaa becna to sell
bananaa banna to be made                           banaanaa banana to make
Kulanaa khulna to be opened                        Kaolanaa kholna to open


Since English does not have intransitive verbs corresponding to those
in Hindi, the Hindi intransitive verbs are best translated by means
of the English passive. For example, a common billboard sight in
India is

   yahaá     iktabaoM     ibaktI           hOM.
   yahk kitabg biktc                       hq
   here books be sold-pres.                are
   Books are sold here.

Notice that the English meaning does not correspond to the Hindi
structure. In Hindi, the intransitive verb ibaknaa bikna is conjugated in
the simple present tense form. Thus, the Hindi sentence is in its
active form, as opposed to the passive form in English.


Negation and auxiliary deletion

The present auxiliary verb is dropped with negative sentences in the
following two sentences:
240                               Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


        Amaoirka           maoM     toja,           masaalaodar         Kanaa     [tnaa           toja,.
        amerika            mg tez   masaledar khana                               itna            tez
        America            in sharp spicy     food                                so much         sharp
        nahIM      haota                    hO.
        nahm hota         hs
        not be-present is[aux.]
        In America the hot food is not so hot.

      and

        laoikna ihndustana              maoM       saba        laaoga     [tnaa           toja,     Kanaa
        lekin hindustan                 mg sab log    itna    tez   khana
        but   India                     in all people so much sharp food

        nahIM Ka sakto          (hOM).
        nahm kha sakte          (hq).
        not eat can-present are
        But in India not everybody can eat such hot food.


      AByaasa abhyas Exercises
      Exercise 1
      Match the places with the purpose for which people visit them. Then
      complete the sentence according to the model presented below:

        Place                     Purpose
        pustkalaya                iktabaoM          pZ,nao
        pustakalaya               kitabg            paRhne
        library                   to read           books

        Sentence
        laaoga pustkalaya                    iktaba          pZ,nao      jaato hOM.
        log pustakalaya kitabg paRhne jate                                        hq.
        People go to the library to read books.

      Do not attempt to translate the English place names into Hindi.

        Place                                  Purpose
      1 laundromat                             ibayar pInao             beer pcne
      2 restaurant                             iflma doKnao             film dekhne
      3 cinema                                 tOrnao                   tsrne
Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?                                    241


4   college                   pZ,nao               paRhne
5   swimming pool             Kanaa Kanao          khana khane
6   bar                       dvaa[- laonao        davac lene
7   pharmacy                  kpD,o Qaaonao        kapRe dhone

Exercise 2
Change the present participial phrase into its corresponding past
participial form in the following sentences:

1   vaao baOzto hue baaolaa.                       vo bsThte hue bola.
2   jaa^na saaoto hue hása rha qaa.                John sote hue hãs raha tha.
3   yao Sahr saaota saa lagata hO.                 ye shshsr sota sa lagta hs.
4   laD,kI raotI hu[- Gar AayaI.                   laRkc rotc huc ghar ayc.
5   AaOrt nao isvaimaMga pUla pr laoTto hue kha.   aurat ne swimming pool par
                                                      leTte hue kaha.

Exercise 3
Which participial forms modify/match the noun.

    ilaKa     likha           baat       bat
    saunaI    sunc            Kt         xat
    hásata    hãsta           laD,ka     laRka
    calatI    caltc           laaoga     log
    BaUlao    bhele           gaaD,I     gaRc
    BaagatI   bhagtc          iballaI    billc

Exercise 4
Change the following sentences into their corresponding passive form:

1   jaa^na nao ek khanaI pZ,I.          John ne ek kahanc paRhc.
2   hma laaoga Kanaa Ka rho hOM.        ham log khana kha rahe hq.
3   tuma @yaa kraogaoÆ                  tum kya karoge?
4   maOMnao icakna krI banaa[-.         mqne chicken curry banayc.
5   ibala yao pZ,ogaa.                  Bill ye paRhega.
6   @yaa Aapnao gaanaa gaayaaÆ          kya apne gana gaya?

Exercise 5
Underline the appropriate form of the subject, verb etc. given within
the brackets in the following sentences:
242                         Unit 9: What’s written in the fortune cookie?


      1 (hmakao/ hma/hmanao) vahaá jaanao ka maaOka (imalaa/ imala).
        (hamko/ham/hamne) vahk jane ka mauka (mila/mile).
      2 (jaa^na nao/ jaa^na/jaa^na kao) ihndustana (jaanaa/jaanao) ka maaOka Aksar imalata hO.
        (John ne/John ko/John) hindustan ( jana/jane) ka mauka aksar
        milta hs.
      3 yao saunahra maaOka (qaa/qaI).           saunahra ‘golden’
        ye sunhsra mauka (tha/thc).
      4 (Aapkao/Aap) iktaba ilaKnao ka maaOka kba (imalaogaI / imalaogaa).
        (apko/ap) kitab likhne ka mauka kab (milegc/milega).
      5 [sa kagaja, maMo @yaa (ilaKa / ilaKI) hO.
        is kagaz mg kya (likha/likhc) hs?
      6 iballaI kao maaOka (imalaa/ imalaI) AaOr vaao dUQa pI gayaI.
        billc ko mauka (mila/milc) aur vo dudh pc gayc.
      7 yao bahut (AcCa maaOka /AcCo maaOk)o kI baat hO.
        ye bahut (accha mauka/acche mauke) kc bat hs.
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                           243




10 BaartIya %yaaOhar
   bharatiya
   tyauhara
           Indian festivals




  By the end of this unit you should be able to:

  •   use various types of relative clauses
  •   use complex sentences
  •   understand more about Hindi passives
  •   get cultural information about the festivals of India
  •   distinguish between scholarly and formal Sanskritized style
      and informal Persianized style
244                                                               Unit 10: Indian festivals


               (CD 2; 32)
      In this unit we will describe some Indian festivals and other symbols
      which underlie the colourful mosaic of the culture and spirit of India.
      You will notice a slight shift in the style, which is more Sanskritized
      now. This style is preferred in formal, literary, scholarly and cultural
      endeavours. The Persianized style is preferred in informal and con-
      versational situations.


                    paRhne ka abhyas 1
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 1
      idvaalaI DCvAlC The festival of lights
       1 idvaalaI Sabd saMskRt ko dIpavalaI Sabd sao Aayaa hO.
         ‘dcvalc’ shabda sanskrit ke ‘dcpavalc’ shabda se aya hs.
       2 dIpavalaI yaa dIvaalaI ka Aqa- hO – dIpkaoM kI pMi@t.
         dcpavalc ya dcvalc ka artha hs – dcpakõ kc parkti.
       3 yah Baart ka sabasao P`aisaW %yaaOhar hO.
         ye bharat ka sab se prasiddha tyauhar hs.
       4 idvaalaI A@tUbar yaa navambar ko mahInao maoM AatI hO.
         divalc aktebar (October) ya navambar (November) ke mahcne mg
         atc hs.
       5 yah %yaaOhar AcCa[- kI baura[- pr AaOr P`akaSa kI AMQakar pr ivajaya ka P`atIk hO.
         ye tyauhara acchac kc burac par aur prakasha kc andhkara par
         vijaya ka pratcka hs.
       6 yao rajaa rama kI raxasa ravaNa pr ivajaya kI KuSaI maoM manaayaa jaata hO.
         ye raja ram kc rakshasa ravaN par vijaya kc xushc mg manaya
         jata hs.
       7 kha jaata hO ik jaba caaOdh vaYa- ko banavaasa AaOr ravaNa pr ivajaya panao ko baad rajaa
          rama Apnao rajyaÊ AyaaoQyaaÊ laaOT rho qaoÊ tba hr Gar nao Ku/SaI maoM idyao jalaayao.
          kaha jata hs ki jab cauda varsha ke banvas aur ravaN par vijay
          pane ke bad raja rama apane rajya, Ayodhya, lauT rahe the, tab
          har ghar ne xushc mg diye jalaye.
       8 [sailayao idvaalaI kI rat kao Aaja tk hr Gar maoM idyao jalaayao jaato hOM.
         isliye divalc kc rat ko aj tak har ghar mg diye jalaye jate hq.
       9 Aap [sa %yaaOhar kao Baart ka iksamasa kh sakto hOM. yah %yaaOhar Baart sao baahr –
          isaMgaapurÊ naopalaÊ i~inadadÊ f,IjaI Aaid k[- doSaaoM maoM manaayaa jaata hO.
          ap is tyauhar ko ‘bharata ka Christmas’ ksh sakte hq. ye tyauhar
          bharat se bahar – Singapore, Nepal, Trinidad, Fiji adi kac deshõ
          mg bhc manaya jata hs.
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                                                   245


10 idvaalaI kI rat kao laaoga pTaK,o AaOr fulaJaiD,yaaá calaato hOM AaOr hr Gar maoM laxmaI pUjana
      haota hO.
      divalc kc rat ko log paTakhe aur phul-jhaRiyk calate hq aur har
      ghar mg ‘lakshmc pejana’ hota hs.
11 jaOsao ik`samasa isaf- [-saa[- hI nahIM manaatoÊ vaOsao idvaalaI isaf- ihnduAaoM ka %yaaOhar nahIM hO.
      Aaja–kla lagaBaga saBaI Qamaao- M ko laaoga idvaalaI manaato hOM.
      jsse Christmas sirf csac hc nahm manate, vsse divalc sirf hinduõ
      ka tyauhar nahm hs. aj-kal lagbhag sabhc dharmõ ke log divalc
      manate hq.
 1 The word ‘dCvAli’ originated (lit. came from = originate) the Sanskrit
   word ‘dCpAvalC’.
 2 The meaning of ‘dCpAvalC’ or ‘dCvAlC’ is ‘a row of lamps.’
 3 This is the most famous festival of India.
 4 Divali comes in the month of October or November.
 5 This festival is a symbol of the victory of ‘good’ over ‘evil’, and
   ‘light’ over ‘darkness’.
 6 This (festival) is celebrated in the glory (lit. happiness) of King
   Rama’s victory over the demon (king) Ravana.
 7 (It) is said that when, after fourteen years of exile and obtaining
   victory over Ravana, King Rama was returning to his kingdom,
   Ayodhya, then every house lit lamps in happiness (at his return).
 8 Therefore, on Divali night until today, lamps are lit in every house.
 9 You can call this festival ‘the Christmas of India’. This festival
   is also celebrated in many countries outside India – Singapore,
   Nepal, Trinidad, Fiji, etc.
10 On Divali night, people light firecrackers and fireworks; and the
   goddess Lakshmi is worshipped (lit. the worship of Lakshmi
   happens/occurs).
11 (Just) as not only Christians celebrate Christmas, (similarly) Divali
   is not the festival of Hindus alone. Nowadays people of almost
   every religion celebrate Divali.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
idvaalaI /dIvaalaI   dcvalc                  the festival of lights/lamps
saMskRt              <sanskrita> (f.)        Sanskrit
Aqa-                 artha (m.)              meaning
dIpk/ idyaa          dcpak/diya (m.)         an earthen lamp
pMi@t                parkti (f.)             line, row
Baart                <bharata> (m.)          the official name of India
Pa`isaw              <prasiddha>             famous
%yaaOhar             <tyauhara> (m.)         festival
246                                                 Unit 10: Indian festivals


      AcCa[-        acchac (f.)       good (n.), quality, ideal
      baura[-       burac (f.)        evil
      P`akaSa       <prakasha> (m.)   light
      AnQakar       <andhkara> (m.)   darkness
      ivajaya       <vijaya> (f.)     victory
      P`atIk        <pratcka> (m.)    symbol
      rajaa         raja (m.)         king, emperor
      rama          <rama> (m.)       Lord Rama (proper name)
      raxasa        <rakshasa> (m.)   demon
      ravaNa        <ravaNa> (m.)     the demon king, Ravana
      ivajaya       <vijaya> (f.)     victory
      manaanaa      manana (+ne)      to celebrate (festival, holiday), persuade
      caaOdh        <cauda>           fourteen
      vaYa-         varsha (m.)       year
      banavaasa     <banvasa> (m.)    exile, residence in forest
      panaa         pana (+ne)        to find, obtain
      rajya         rajya (m.)        kingdom
      AyaaoQyaa     ayodhya (f.)      Ayodhya, a place name
      laaOTnaa      lauTna (–ne)      to return
      jalaanaa      jalana (+ne)      to light, to burn; to kindle
      Aaid          adi               etc.
      k[-           kac               several
      doSa          <desha> (m.)      country
      pTaKa         paTaxa (m.)       a firecracker
      fulaJaD,I     phul-jhaRc (f.)   a kind of firework that emits flower-
                                         like sparks
      calaanaa      calana (+ne)      to drive, to manage (business), to light/
                                         play firecrackers
      laxmaI        lakshmc (f.)      Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth,
                                         fortune, prosperity
      pUjana        <pejana> (m.)     worship
      jaOsao (ik)   jsse (ki)         as, as if
      [-saa[-       csac              a Christian
      vaOsao        vsse              like that, similarly
      ihndu         hindu             a Hindu
      lagaBaga      <lagbhaga>        about, approximately, almost
      Qama-         <dharma> (m.)     religion


      Pronunciation
      With the exception of caaOdh cauda, all the words enclosed in angle
      brackets < > are written with the word-final vowel A a. However, in
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                          247


colloquial pronunciation, the final A a is dropped. Since the above
passage is written in high and formal style, the use of the word-final
A a is indicated.
   The numeral cauda ‘fourteen’ is written caaOdh caudah.


Notes
Sanskritized vs Perso-Arabic style
Style differences in Hindi primarily involve vocabulary. High or
formal literary style is often equated with borrowing from Sanskrit,
and colloquial style usually borrows from Arabic and Persian. The
simple substitution of the Perso-Arabic words for the corresponding
Sanskrit words will yield the informal colloquial style of Hindi.

Sanskrit                             Perso-Arabic

Aqa- artha                           matlaba matlab         meaning
Baart bharata                        ihndustana hindustan   India
P`aisaw prasiddha                    maSahUr mashher        famous
vaYa- arsha                          saala      sal         year
lagaBaga lagbhaga                    krIba karcb            about, approximately



Agentless passives
The Hindi equivalent of the English sentence ‘this festival is
celebrated’ is:

   yao     %yaaOhar       manaayaa            jaata                 hO.
   ye    tyauhar         manaya               jata                  hs.
   this festival (m.) celebrate-past          passive-go-pres.      is
   This festival is celebrated.

Hindi tends to omit the passive subject. The opening clause of sen-
tence 7 of Reading practice 1 further exemplifies this point. Notice
the omission of the passive subject (‘by x’) in the following paragraph:

   kha            jaata              hO.
   kaha        jata                  hs.
   say-past passive-go-pres.         is
   (It) is said.
248                                                                                Unit 10: Indian festivals


      Generic passive subjects, such as ‘by people’, are understood in these
      sentences.

      Relative clauses
      The relative clause relates two clauses. The relative clause contains a
      relative pronoun which begins with the sound j- in Hindi, while in
      English a relative pronoun begins with the wh- word. For example,
      the English sentence ‘The people who live in India celebrate Divali’
      is paraphrased as ‘which/who people live in India, those people
      celebrate Divali’. So, the Hindi sentence would be

         jaao      laaoga           Baart          maoM         rhto                        hOM
         jo  log    bharat mg rshste                                                        hq
         who people India in live-present                                                   are

         vao           laaoga         idvaalaI            manaato                          hOM.
         ve     (log)  divalc manate             hq.
         those people Divali celebrate-pres. are
         The people who live in India celebrate Divali.

      The jaao jo- clause is called the relative clause and is linked to the
      correlative clause. The second repeated noun (laaoga log ‘people’) can
      be dropped, and the final result is as follows:

         jaao laaoga Baart                 maoM    rhto              hOM     vao      idvaalaI manaato         hOM.
         jo      log        bharat mg rshte                          hq      ve       divalc manate            hq.

      The list of relative and correlative pronouns is given below:

                                Simple                                         Oblique
                                Singular                   Plural              Singular             Plural

      Relative                  jaao jo                    jaao jo             ijasa jis            ijana jin who/which
      Correlative               vaao/vah vo                vao ve              ]sa us               ]na un

      The correlative pronouns are the same as the third person pronouns.
      Observe one more example of Hindi relative clauses:

         ijasa                  %yaaOhar          ka naama                 idvaalaI        hOÊ    vaao   Pa`isaw      hO.
         jis          tyauhar ka nam dcvalc hs, vo    prasiddh hs
         which-obl. festival of name Divali is that famous is
         The festival whose name is Divali is famous.
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                                                 249


Other types of relative clause found in Hindi and their markers are
as follows:


                    Relative                                          Correlative

Place               jahaá jahk where, in which                        vahaá vahk there, in that place
Time                jaba jab when                                     tba tab then
Manner              jaOsao jsse as, in which manner                   vaOsao vsse in that manner
Directional         ijaQar jidhar in which direction                  ]Qar udhar in that direction
Kind                jaOsaa jssa as/which kind                         vaOsaa vssa that kind
Quantity            ijatnaa jitna as much/many as                     ]tnaa utna that much/many

The relative clauses of kind and quantity behave like ‘green’ types of
adjective which agree with their following noun in number and gender.
   The instance of a time relative clause can be found in sentence 7
of the Reading practice at the beginning of this unit:

   jaba           rajaa   rama           Apnao      rajya               laaOT           rho  qaoÊ
   jab . . .      raja    ram            apne       rajya   lauT                        rahe the
   when           king    Rama           own        kingdom return                      ing was

   tba    hr     Gar     nao KuSaI       maoM idyao  jalaae /jalaayao.
   tab har       ghar    ne  xushc       mg diye     jalaye.
   then every house agent happiness in lamps lit
   When King Rama was returning to his kingdom, then every house
   lit lamps in happiness.

Sentence 11 exemplifies the manner relative clause:

   jaOsao     ik`samasa          isaf-    [-saa[-                hI             nahIM
   jsse       Christmas sirf              csac       hc       nahm
   as         Christmas only              Christians emp.part.not
   manaatoÊ
   manate,
   celebrate-present

   vaOsao                   idvaalaI      isaf-      ihnduAaoM         ka %yaaOhar          nahIM   hO.
   vsse               dcvalc sirf hinduõ ka tyauhar nahm hs.
   in that manner Divali only Hindus of festival not is
   (Just) as not only Christians celebrate Christmas (similarly) Divali
   is not the festival of the Hindus alone.
250                                                                     Unit 10: Indian festivals


                    paRhne ka abhyas 2
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 2    (CD 2; 34)

      haolaI – ek AaOr rMga–ibarMgaa %yaaOhar holC ek aur
      raRga-biraRgA tyauhAr Holi, the festival
      of colours
       1 haolaI Baart ka ek AaOr rMga–ibarMgaa %yaaOhar hO.
         holc bharat ka ek aur rarga-birarga tyauhar hs.
       2 yah basant ?tu maoM AatI hO.
         ye vasanta ritu mg atc hs.
       3 [sa samaya gaaávaaoM maoM f,sala kTnao ko baad hr Gar maoM Anaaja Aa jaata hO,.
         is samaya gãvõ mg fasal kaTne ke bad har ghar mg bahut anaj a
         jata hs.
       4 [sailayao yao %yaaOhar KuSa-halaI ka sandoSa laata hO.
         isliye ye tyauhar xush-halc ka sandesh lata hs.
       5 [sa idna laaoga bahut ]%saah sao ek dUsaro pr rMga foMkto hOM.
         is din log bahut utsaha se ek desre par rarga fgkte hq.
       6 baccao ipcakarI sao rMgaIna panaI Dalato hOMÊ jaba ik baD,o laaoga saUKo rMga sao Kolato hO,MÊ ijasakao
           gaulaala khto hOM.
           bacce pickarc se rargcn panc Dalte hq, jab ki baRe log sekhe
           rarga se khelte hq jis ko ‘gulal’ kshte hq.
       7 halaaáik [sa idna hr trh ka rMga lagaayaa jaata hOÊ laala rMga sava-—iP`aya hO @yaaoMik laala
           rMga P`aoma ka P`atIk hO.
         halkki is din har tara ka rarga lagaya jata hs, lal rarga sarva-
         priya hs kyõki lal rarga ‘prema’ ka pratck hs.
       8 haolaI ko idna Baart maoM ‘karnaIvala’ jaOsaa vaatavarNa haota hO. yah baD,I QaUma–Qaama sao
           vaRMdavana maoM manaayaa jaata hO jahaá EaIkRYNa plao qao.
           holc ke din bharat mg ‘Carnival’ jssa vatavaraNa hota hs. ye
           baRc dhem-dham se brindaban mg manaya jata hs jahk shrc krishn
           pale the.
       9 haolaI ko baaro maoM k[- Pa`acaIna khainayaaá Pa`cailat hOM jaao mana kI piva~ta pr ja,aor dotI hO.
         holc ke bare mg kac praccn kahaniyk pracalit hq jo mana kc
         pavitrata par zor detc hq.
      10 [sa idna laaoga baD,I P`asannata sao ek–dUsaro kao galao lagaato hOM AaOr Sa~uta BaUla kr Sa~u
           kao BaI ima~ banaa laoto hOM.
           is din log baRc prasannata se ek-desre ko gale lagate hq aur
           shatruta bhel kar shatru ko bhc mitra bana lete hq.

       1 Holi is another colourful festival of India.
       2 It falls during spring (lit. it comes during the spring season).
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                   251


 3 At this time after the harvest (lit. cutting) of the crop, every house
   is full of grain (lit. in every house, a lot of grain comes).
 4 Therefore, this festival brings the message of prosperity.
 5 On this day people throw colour on each other with great enthusiasm.
 6 The children throw coloured water with a water-gun while the elders
   play with dry colour, which is called ‘gulAl’.
 7 Although on this day all kinds of colours are used, (the) red (colour)
   is the favourite because it is the symbol of ‘love’.
 8 On the day of Holi generally (there) is a carnival-like atmosphere
   in India. This (festival) is celebrated with great joy (lit. pomp and
   show) in Brindavan where Lord Krishna was brought up.
 9 (There) are several stories prevalent about Holi which emphasize
   the purification of the mind.
10 On this day people embrace each other with great joy and, forget-
   ting enmity (lit. and having forgotten enmity) (they) make even
   the enemy (their) friend.

SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
haolaI          holc (f.)         the festival of colours
rMga            rarga (m.)        colour
rMga–ibarMgaa   rarga-birarga     colourful
basant          <basanta>         spring
?tu             ritu (f.)         season
gaaáva          gkv (m.)          village
fsala           fasal (f.)        crop
kTnaa           kaTne (–ne)       to be cut
ko baad         (ke) bad          after
Anaaja          anaj (m.)         grain, corn
KuSa–halaI      xush-halc (f.)    prosperity
sandoSa         sandesh (m.)      message
laanaa          lana (–ne)        to bring
]%saah          utsah (m.)        enthusiasm, joy, zeal
ek dUsaro sao   ek desre se       with one another/each other
foMknaa         phgkna (+ne)      to throw
ipcakarI        pickarc (f.)      a syringe-shaped water-gun made
                                     of wood or metal
rMgaIna         rargcna           colourful
panaI           panc (m.)         water
Dalanaa         Dalna (+ne)       to put in, throw
jabaik          jabki             while
saUKa           sekha (m. adj.)   dry
252                                                         Unit 10: Indian festivals


      Kolanaa            khelna (+/–ne)      to play
      khto hOM           kshte hq            is called/is said
      halaaáik           halkki              although
      lagaanaa           lagana (+ne)        to attach, to stick
      laala              lal                 red
      sava-–iP`aya       sarva-priya         loved by all, the most favourite
      P`aoma             prema (m.)          love
      jaOsaa             jssa                as
      vaatavarNa         vatavaraNa (m.)     atomosphere, environment
      QaUmaQaama sao     dhem-dham se        with pomp and show
      baMRdavana         <brindavan>         the place where Lord Krishna was
                                                brought up
      EaIkRYNa           shrc krishna        Lord Krishna
      planaa             palna (–ne)         to be brought up
      P`aacaIna          praccna             ancient
      P`acailat haonaa   pracalit hona (–ne) to be prevalent
      mana               mana (m.)           mind
      piva~ta            pavitrata (f.)      purification, holiness
      ja,aor donaa       zor dena (+ne)      to emphasize
      P`asannata         prasannata (f.)     happiness, joy
      galao lagaanaa     gale lagana         to embrace
      Sa~u               shatru (m.)         enemy
      Sa~uuta            shatruta (f.)       enmity, hostility
      BaUlanaa           bhelna (+/–ne)      to forget
      ima~               mitra (m.)          friend


                    paRhne ka abhyas 3
      pZ,nao ka AByaasa
      Reading practice 3    (CD 2; 35)

      rxaa–banQana / ra#aI RakshAband han or rAk hC
      ‘The festival of love and protection’
      1. rxaabanQana ka dUsara naama raKI BaI hO.
         rakshabandhban ka desra nam rakhc bhc hs.
      2 yah Baa[-–bahna ko ATUT P`aoma kao yaad idlaata hO.
         ye bhac-bshsn ke aTeT prem ko yad dilata hs.
      3 [sa idna hr bahna Apnao Baa[- kao saunahra Qaagaa baaáQatI hOM.
         is din har bshsn apne bhac ko ek sunhara dhaga bkdhtc hq.
      4 [sa Qaagao ka Aqa- hO ik Baa[- Apnao bahna kao vacana dota hO ik vah hmaoSaa ]sakI rxaa
           krogaa.
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                                                   253


    is dhage ka artha hs ki bhac apnc bshsn ko vacan deta hs ki vo
    hamesha uskc raksha karega.
5   yahaá tk ik ivadoSaI Baa[- BaI puranao samaya sao [sa vacana kao pUra krto rho hMO.
    yahk tak ki videshc bhac bhc purane samaya se is vacan ko pera
    karate rahe hq.
6   saaolahvaIM SatabdI maoM gaujarat ko saultana nao ica<aaOD, pr Aak`maNa ikyaa.
    saulvc shatabdc mg gujarat ke sultan ne cittauRa par akramaNa
    kiya.
7   ica<aaOD, kI ranaI kNa-vatI nao praijat haonao sao phlao idllaI ko mauga,la sama`aT humaayaUá ko pasa
    raKI BaojaI.
  cittuRa kc ranc karNavatc ne parajit hone se pshsle dillc ke mugal
  samraT hemayo ke pas rakhc bhejc.
8 jaba tk humaayaUá ApnaI ApnaayaI bahna kao bacaanao ko ilayao ica<aaOD, phuácaaÊ tba tk ranaI
    jaaOhr rcaa caukI qaI.
    jab tak hemayo apnc apnayc bshsn ko bacane ke liye cittauRa
    pahjca, tab tak ranc jauhar raca cukc thc.
9   laoikna humaayaUá nao ifr BaI gaujarat ko saulatana kao hrayaa AaOr ranaI kNa-vatI ko baoTo kaoÊ
    ijasakao laD,a[- ko samaya iCpakr ica<aaOD, sao baahr Baoja idyaa gayaa qaaÊ rajya ka
    ]<araiQakarI banaayaa.
    lekin hemayo ne phir bhc gujrat ke sultAn ko haraya aur ranc
    karNavatc ke beTe ko, jisko laRac ke samaya chipa kar
    cittauRa se bahar bhej diya gaya tha, rajya ka uttaradhikarc
    banaya.

1 Rakshabandan’s other name is Rakhi.
2 This (festival) reminds (us) of the unbreakable love between brother
  and sister.
3 On this day every sister ties (bracelets of) golden thread (on) her
  brother(’s wrist).
4 The meaning of this thread is that the brother vows to his sister that
  he will defend and always protect her.
5 Even foreign brothers have been fulfilling this vow since the olden
  times.
6 In the sixteenth century the Sultan of Gujarat attacked Chittaur.
7 The queen of Chittaur, Karnavati sent Rakhi to the Mogul king of
  Delhi before her defeat.
8 By the time Humayun reached Chittaur to save his (now) adopted
  sister, the queen Karnavati had immolated herself.
9 Still Humayun defeated the Sultan of Gujarat and made the son of
  the queen Karnavati the heir of the kingdom, who (had been) sent
  secretly out of Chittaur at the time of battle (with the Sultan of
  Gujarat).
254                                                  Unit 10: Indian festivals


      SabdavalaI shabdavalc Vocabulary
      rxaa–banQana     raksha-bandhan (m.)    ‘the festival of love and protection’
      ATUT             aTeT                   unbreakable
      yaad idlaanaa    yad dilana (+ne)       to remind
      saunahra         sunhara (m. adj.)      golden
      Qaagaa           dhaga (m.)             (bracelets of ) thread
      baaáQanaa        bkdhna (+ne)           to tie
      Aqa-             artha (m.)             meaning
      vacana           vacan (m.)             promise
      rxaa krnaa       raksha karna (+ne)     to protect, to defend
      yahaá tk ik      yahk tak ki            to the point, to the exent that
      ivadoSaI         videshc (m.)           foreigner
      pUra             pura (m. adj.)         complete, whole, full
      pUra krnaa       pera karna (+ne)       to complete
      saaolahvaIM      <solvm>                sixteenth
      SatabdI          shatabdc (m.)          century
      guajarat         gujarat                the state of Gujarat
      saulatana        sultan (m.)            a Sultan, king, emperor
      ica<aaOD,        cittauRa               a very famous historical place in
                                                 Rajasthan
      Aak`maNa krnaa   akramaNa karna (+ne)   to attack
      ranaI            ranc (f.)              queen
      praijat haonaa   parajit hona (–ne)     to be defeated
      mauga,la         mugal                  the Moguls
      sama`aT          samraT (m.)            king, emperor
      Baojanaa         bhejna (+ne)           to send
      Apnaanaa         apnana (+ne)           to adopt
      ApnaayaI         apnayc                 adopted
      bacaanaa         bacana (+ne)           to save
      tba tk           tab tak                by then
      jaaOhr rcaanaa   jauhar racana          When defeat seemed certain, Rajput
                                                 women immolated themselves
                                                 while Rajput men used to
                                                 perform a deliberate battle to the
                                                 death, leaving the enemy with an
                                                 empty victory. The Rajputs are
                                                 from the colourful and glamorous
                                                 desert state of Rajasthan in the
                                                 north-west of India.
      cUaáik           coki                   because
      hranaa           harana (+ne)           to defeat
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                                          255


laD,a[-               laRac (f.)                          fight, battle, war
iCpa kr               chipa kar                           secretly
rajya                 rajya (m.)                          kingdom
]<araiQakarI          uttaradhikarc (f.)                  heir, inheritor
banaanaa              banana (+ne)                        to make


Cultural note
]phar donaa AaOr ivanama`ta Gift-giving and politeness
Gift-giving is a special art in India which requires linguistic finesse.
Most Indians don’t open their gifts in the presence of their guests.
Don’t come to a premature judgement about this behavior. They
express their gratitude indirectly using expressions such as:

     yao           tklaIf,    Aapnao             @yaaoM           kIÆ
     ye   taklcf   apne         kyõ kc?
     This trouble you-agent why did
     Why did you go to this trouble?

Or

     [sakI tao                kao[-     j,a$rt            nahIM     qaI.
     iskc to          koc zarurat nahm thc.
     Its   to-part. any need        not was
     As regards this, there was no need.

Your answer should be:

     tklaIf,          kI @yaa          baat         hOÆ
     taklcf   kc kya     bat hs?
     trouble of what matter is
     What’s the trouble?
You, as a guest, can use the following expression while offering the
gift:

ek         CaoTI       saI    caIja,      laayaa/laayaI                 hUá.   AaSaa   hO   ik
ek         choTc sc           ccz   laya/layc                           ho.    asha hs      ki
one        little -ish        thing brought (m./f.)                     am.    hope is      that
Aapkao         psand          AayaogaI.
apko     pasand ayegc.
you-to likeness come-will
(I) brought a very small(ish) gift. (I) hope you like it.
256                                             Unit 10: Indian festivals


      However, nowadays educated Indians are familiar with Western
      culture and both open gifts in the presence of their guests and openly
      express their gratitude.


      Observation exercise
      BaartIya svaaistk bhartcya swastika ‘The Indian
      swastika’
      Speaking of festivals, perhaps I should point out that one should
      not be frightened or draw the wrong conclusions if one sees a
      swastika sign on the occasion of a festivity, or even posted perman-
      ently on shops or products. In India, particularly among the Hindus,
      Buddhists and Jains, the symbol is an integrated aspect of spiritual,
      social and commercial life. The Nazis’ symbol was borrowed from
      India and was twisted in meaning. The original Indian swastika is
      the symbol of universal prosperity and the well-being of humanity.
      The original Indian swastika is shown below.




      You will have noticed that in the Indian swastika, the four lines
      point to the four directions and there is a point of cross-section in
      the middle. This cross-section point symbolizes an individual. The
Unit 10: Indian festivals                                                          257


symbol states: ‘Wherever I am there should be prosperity around me
in all four directions.’ Thus, this symbol is created and recreated in
the spirit of world peace and prosperity in India every day. Never
lose sight of its intrinsic symbolic meaning. If the word ‘swastika’
still creates shock waves in the West, then imagine the resentment
of Indians whose most spiritual and auspicious symbol has been
deformed in the West, to the extent that they feel totally betrayed.
In short, the Indian swastika is not twisted but is straight. Further-
more, it is usually accompanied by an expression beginning with
SauBa shubha, which means ‘auspicious’.

AByaasa abhyas Exercises
Exercise 1
Match the passive statements given in the right-hand column with
the three festivals given on the left:

  idvaalaI   divalc             Sa~uAaoM kao BaI ima~ banaayaa jaata hO.
                                shatruõ ko bhc mitra banaya jata hs.
  haolaI     holc               idyao jalaayao jaato hOM.
                                diye jalaye jate hq.
  rxaabanQana rakshabandhan Qaagaa baaáQaa jaata hO.
                                dhaga bkdha jata hs.
                                pTaK,o calaayao jaato hOM.
                                paTaxe calaye jate hq.
                                gaulaala lagaayaa jaata hO.
                                gulal lagaya jata hs.
                                rMga sao Kolaa jaata hO.
                                rarga se khela jata hs.
                                rajaa rama ko Apnao rajya laaOTnao kI KuSaI maoM
                                   manaayaa jaata hO.
                                raja ram ke apne rajya lauTne kc
                                  xushc mg manaya jata hs.

Exercise 2
Translate into English the sentences given in the right-hand column
in Exercise 1.
258                                                             Unit 10: Indian festivals


      Exercise 3

      Read the following relative clause statements and then identify the
      festival associated with each statement:

      1   vaao %yaaOhar jaao A@tUbar ko mahInao maoM Aata hO.
        vo tauhar jo aktebar ke mahcne mg ata hs.
      2 vaao %yaaOhar jaao Baa[- AaOr bahna ka hO.
        vo tauhar jo bhac aur bshsn ka hs.
      3 vaao %yaaOhar ijasamaoM bahna Baa[- kao Qaagaa baaáQatI hO.
        vo tauhar jismg bshsn bhac ko dhaga bkdhtc hs.
      4 vaao %yaaOhar ijasa idna laaoga ek dUsaro pr rMga foMkto hOM .
        vo tauhar jis din log ek-desre par rarga phgkte hq.
      5 vaao %yaaOhar ijasa idna rajaa rama AyaaoQyaa laaOTo qao.
        vo tauhar jis din raja ram ayodhya lauTe the.
Reference grammar                                                               259




maUla vyaakrNa
mel vyakaraNa
Reference grammar




Nouns
Nouns are inflected for gender, number and case.


Gender
There are two genders in Hindi, masculine and feminine. The gender
system is partly semantically based and partly phonologically based.
The rule of thumb is that inflected nouns ending in Aa -a are usually
assigned masculine gender whereas the nouns ending in [- -c are fem-
inine. The semantic criterion (logical sex) takes precedence over the
phonological criterion. Overall, the gender is unpredictable. rasta rasta
‘path’ is masculine but rah rah ‘path’ is feminine. daZ,I daRhc ‘beard’ is
feminine and so is saonaa sena ‘army’. Although AadmaI admc ends in [- -c,
it is masculine, and maata mata ends in Aa -a but is feminine. The class
of masculine nouns which do not end in Aa -a and the feminine nouns
which do not end in [- -c are affectionately called ‘nerd’ nouns.
     People of the male sex take masculine gender while those of the
female sex are assigned feminine gender. Therefore, nouns such as
laD,ka laRka ‘boy’ and AadmaI admc ‘man’ are masculine whereas laD,kI
laRkc ‘girl’ and AaOrt aurat ‘woman’ are feminine. The same is true of
some non-human animate nouns. Nouns such as ku<aa kutta ‘dog’,
GaaoD,a ghoRa ‘horse’, baMdr bandar ‘monkey’ and baOla bsl ‘ox’ are mascu-
line and kuityaa kutiya ‘bitch’, GaaoD,I ghoRc ‘mare’, baMdrI bandarc ‘female
monkey’ and gaaya gay ‘cow’ are feminine.
     Nouns denoting professions are usually masculine, as BaMgaI bhargc
‘sweeper’.
     Some animate nouns (species of animals, birds, insects, etc.) ex-
hibit unigender properties in the sense that they are either masculine
260                                                        Reference grammar


      or feminine. For example, macCr macchar ‘mosquito’, kID,a kcRa ‘in-
      sect’, caIta ccta ‘leopard’ and ]llaU ulle ‘owl’ are masculine in gender,
      and nouns such as icaiD,yaa ciRiya ‘bird’, kaoyala koyal ‘cuckoo’, ittlaI titlc
      ‘butterfly’, ma@KI makkhc ‘fly’ and maClaI machlc ‘fish’ are feminine. To
      specify the sex of animate nouns, words such as nar nar ‘male’ and
      maada mada ‘female’ are prefixed to create compound nouns such as
      maada–macCr mada-macchar ‘female-mosquito’ and nar–icaiD,yaa nar-ciRiya
      ‘male-bird’.
          In the case of inanimate nouns, land, abstract, collective and
      material nouns gender is partly determined by form and partly
      by semantics. On many occasions both criteria fail to predict the
      gender. The names of the following classes of nouns are usually
      masculine:

      trees – pIpla pcpal (the name of a tree), saagavaana sagvan ‘teak’, dovadar
         devdar ‘cedar’, caID, ccR ‘pine’, Aama am ‘mango’ (however, [malaI imlc
         ‘tamarind’ is feminine);
      minerals and jewels – laala lal ‘ruby’, saaonaa sona ‘gold’, kaoyalaa
         koyala ‘coal, hIra hcra ‘diamond’ (however, caaádI ckdc ‘silver’ is
         feminine);
      liquids – tola tel ‘oil’, dUQa dedh ‘milk’, panaI panc ‘water’ (however, Saraba
         sharab ‘wine/liquor’ is feminine);
      crops – Qaana dhan ‘rice’, baajara bajra ‘millet’, maTr maTar ‘pea’;
      mountains and oceans – ihmaalaya himalaya ‘Himalayas’, ihndmahasaagar
         hindmahasagar ‘Indian Ocean’;
      countries – ihndustana hindustan ‘India’, paikstana pakistan ‘Pakistan’, AmarIka
         amrcka ‘America’;
      Gods, demons, and heavenly bodies – ba,*maa brahma ‘Brahma’, saUrja
         seraj ‘sun’;
      days and months (Native calendar) – saaomavaar somvar ‘Monday’, vaOsaaK
         vaisakh ‘Vaisakh’;
      body parts – isar sir ‘head’, kana kan ‘ear’, haqa hath ‘hand’ (however,
         AaáK kkh ‘eye’, jabaana zaban ‘tongue’ are feminine); and
      abstract nouns – P`aoma prem ‘love’, gaussaa gussa ‘anger’, sauK sukh
         ‘comfort’ (however, some abstract nouns, including a synonym
         of P`aoma prem ‘love’, i.e. maaohbbat mohabbat, are feminine).


      Number
      Like English, Hindi has two ways of indicating numbers: singular
      and plural. However, there are some differences between the Hindi
Reference grammar                                                              261


and the English way of looking at the singularity or pluralrity of
objects. Words such as pjaamaa pajama ‘pyjamas’, baala bal ‘hair’ and kMOcaI
kqcc ‘scissors’ are singular in Hindi but plural in English. Similarly,
caavala caval ‘rice’ is singular in English but is both singular and plural
in Hindi.
     Masculine nouns which end in Aa -a change to -e in their plural
form. The other group (the ‘nerd group’) of masculine nouns that
do not end in Aa -a remain unchanged. Therefore, they adopt they
following patterns:

Masculine nouns
Pattern I: ending in a → e
   baoTa beTa son               baoTo beTe sons
   laD,,ka laRka boy            laD,ko laRke boys
Exceptions: rajaa raja ‘king’, ipta pita ‘father’ – remain unchanged.

Pattern II (‘nerd nouns’): not ending in a →
remain unchanged
   AadmaI admc man                 AadmaI admc men
   gauà guru teacher               gauà guru teachers

Feminine nouns
Similarly, feminine nouns also exhibit patterns. Singular feminine
nouns ending in -c (including those ending in i or iya) change to iyk
in their plural forms, while those feminine nouns not ending in -c
add g in the plural.

Pattern I: ending in c → iyk
   baoTI     beTc   daughter           baoiTyaaá beTiyk daughters
   laD,kI laRkc girl                   laD,ikyaaá laRkiyk girls
   icaiD,yaa ciRiya bird               icaiD,yaaá ciRiyk birds

Pattern II (‘nerd nouns’): not ending in c → add g
   iktaba kitab book               iktabaoM kitabg books
   maata mata mother               maataeá matag mothers
   bahU   bahe bride               bahueá bahug brides
262                                                      Reference grammar


      Note that feminine nouns ending in a long e shorten the vowel
      before the plural ending.


      Direct and oblique case
      Some nouns or noun phrases reflect ‘peer pressure’ under the influ-
      ence of a postposition, i.e. they change their shape when they appear
      before a postposition. The form of the noun which occurs before a
      postposition is called the oblique case. The regular non-oblique forms
      are called direct forms, as shown above.
         Masculine singular nouns which follow pattern I change under
      the influence of postpositions. The word-final vowel Aa a changes
      to e in the oblique case. However, all plural nouns change and end
      in õ before postpositions. The following examples illustrate these
      rules.

      Masculine nouns

      Pattern I: ending in -a

                    Direct                 Oblique case (before postpositions)

      Singular      baoTa beTa son         baoTokao beTe ko to the son
                                               (i.e. a → e)
      Plural        baoTo   beTe   sons    baoTaoMsao beTõ se by the sons
                                               (i.e. e → õ)



      Pattern II (‘nerd nouns’): not ending in a

                   Direct                  Oblique case (before postpositions)

      Singular     AadmaI admc man         AadmaI maoM      admc mg   in the man
                                              (i.e. no change)
      Plural       AadmaI admc man         AadimayaaoM maoM admiyõ mg in the men
                                           (i.e. õ added; slight change in the
                                              vowel c which becomes i, and
                                              the semivowel y intervenes.)
Reference grammar                                                                   263


Feminine nouns

Pattern I: ending in c

           Direct                       Oblique case (before postpositions)

Singular   baoTI beTc daughter          baoTI pr beTc par        on the daughter
                                        (i.e. no change)
Plural     baoiTyaaá beTiyk daughters   baoiTyaaoM pr bsTiyõ par on the daughters
                                        (i.e. k changes to õ)



Pattern II (‘nerd nouns’): nouns not ending in c

              Direct                        Oblique case (before postpositions)

Singular      iktaba kitab       book       iktaba maoM    kitab mg in the book
                                              (i.e. no change)
Plural        iktabaoM kitabg book          iktabaaoM maoM kitabõ mg in the books
                                              (i.e. g changes to õ)




Articles
Hindi has no equivalents to the English articles ‘a’, ‘an’ and ‘the’.
This gap is filled by means of indirect devices such as the use of the
numeral ek ek for the indefinite article, and the use of the postposition
kao ko with an object to fulfill the function of the definite article.


Pronouns
Although the case system of pronouns is essentially the same as that
of nouns, pronouns have more case forms in the oblique case than
nouns, as exemplified below by the difference in pronominal form
with different postpositions.
264                                                                       Reference grammar


      Personal: singular

      Direct     Oblique

                 General        Oblique + kao ko Oblique + ka kA                  Oblique + nao ne
                 Oblique        (e.g. me)        (e.g. my) possessives            (agentive past)

      maOM       mauJa          mauJakao = mauJao       maora                     maOMnao
      mq         mujh           mujhko = mujhe          mera                      mqne
      I                         me                      my                        I
      tU         tuJa           tuJakao = tuJao         tora                      tUnao
      te         tujh           tujhko = tujhe          tera                      tene
      you                       (to) you                your                      you
      vah/vaao   ]sa            ]sakao = ]sao           ]saka                     ]sanao
      vo         us             usko = use              uska                      usne
      he/she                    (to) him/her            his/her                   he/she
      yah/yao    [sa            [sakao = [sao           [saka                     [sanao
      ye         is             isko = ise              iska                      isne
      this



      Personal: plural

      Direct             Oblique

                         General       Oblique + kao ko         Oblique + ka kA   Oblique + nao ne
                         Oblique                                (e.g. our)        (agentive past)
                                                                possessives

      hma                hma           hmakao = hmaoM           hmaara            hmanao
      ham                ham           hamko = hamg             hamara            hamne
      we                               (to) us                  our               we
      tuma               tuma          tumakao = tumhoM         tumhara           tumanao
      tum                tum           tumko = tumhg            tumhara           tumne
      you                              (to) you                 your              you
      (familiar)
      Aap                Aap           Aapkao                   Aapka             Aapnao
      ap                 ap            apko                     apka              apne
      you                              (to) you                 your              you
      (honorific)
      vao                ]na           ]nakao = ]nhoM           ]naka             ]nhaoMnao
      ve                 un            unko = unhg              unka              unhõne
      they                             (to) them                their             they
      yao                [na           [nakao = [nhoM           [naka             [nhaoMnao
      ye                 in            inko = unhg              inka              inhõne
      these
Reference grammar                                                               265


Other Pronouns: singular

Direct      Oblique

            General   Oblique + kao ko     Oblique + ka kA   Oblique + nao ne
            Oblique                        possessives       (agentive past)

kaOna       iksa      iksakao = iksao      iksaka            iksanao
kaun        kis       kisko = kise         kiska             kisne
who?                  (to) whom?           whose?            who?
jaao        ijasa     ijasakao = ijasao    ijasaka           ijasanao
jo          jis       jisko = jise         jiska             jisne
who                   (to) whom            whose             who
(relative
clause)
@yaa        iksa      iksakao = iksao      iksaka            –
kya         kis       kisko = kise         kiska
what
kao[-       iksaI     iksaIkao             iksaIka           iksaInao
koc         kisc      kiscko               kiscka            kiscne
someone               (to) someone         someone’s         someone



Other pronouns: plural

Direct      Oblique

            General   Oblique + kao ko     Oblique + ka kA   Oblique + nao ne
            oblique                        possessives       (agentive past)

kaOna       ikna      iknakao = iknhoM     iknaka            iknhaoMnao
kaun        kin       kinko = kinhg        kinka             kinhõne
who?                  (to) whom?           whose?            who?
jaao        ijana     ijanakao = ijanhoM   ijanaka           ijanhaoMnao
jo          jin       jinko = jinhq        jinka             jinhone
who         who       (to) whom            whose             who
(relative
clause)



Adjectives
Adjectives can be classified into two groups: hra hara ‘green’ (inflecting
adjectives) and laala lal ‘red’ (non-inflecting adjectives). Like masculine
266                                                                   Reference grammar


      nouns, green adjectives end in Aa -a. They change their form, or agree,
      with the following nouns in terms of number and gender and show
      the signs of ‘peer pressure’ before a postposition. Red adjectives
      which do not end in Aa -a remain invariable. The following endings
      are used with the green adjectives when they are inflected for number,
      gender and case.


      Pattern I: the hra harA ‘green’ adjectives
      (inflecting)

                            Direct case                               Oblique case
                            Singular           Plural                 Singular          Plural
      Masculine             -a                 -e                     -e                -e
      Feminine              -c                 -c                     -c                -c


      Example:
        Direct                               Oblique
        AcCa laD,ka                          AcCo laD,ko sao
        accha laRka          good boy        acche laRke se             by a/the good boy
        AcCo laD,ko                          AcCo laD,kaoM sao
        acche laRke          good boys       acche laRkõ se             by good boys
        AcCI laD,kI                          AcCI laD,kI sao
        acchc laRkc          good girl       acchc laRkc se             by a/the good girl
        AcCI laD,ikyaaá                      AcCI laD,ikyaaoM sao
        acchc laRkiyk        good girls      acchc laRkiyõ se by good girls


      Pattern II: the red (laala lAl) adjectives
      (non-inflecting)
        Direct                               Oblique
        saundr laD,ka                        saundr laD,ko sao
        sundar laRka        handsome boy     sundar laRke se           by a/the handsome boy
        saundr laD,ko                        saundr laD,kaoM sao
        sundar laRke        handsome boys sundar laRkõ se              by handsome boys
        saundr laD,kI                        saundr laD,kI sao
        sundar laRkc        beautiful girl   sundar laRkc se           by a/the beautiful girl
        saundr laD,ikyaaá                    saundr laD,ikyaaoM sao
        sundar laRkiyk beautiful girls       sundar laRkiyõ se by beautiful girls
Reference grammar                                                          267


Possessive pronouns (listed under oblique pronouns + ka ka), the
reflexive pronoun Apnaa apna ‘self’ and participles behave like green
adjectives; therefore, they are inflected in number, gender and case.


Postpositions
The Hindi equivalent of English prepositions such as ‘to’, ‘in’, ‘at’,
‘on’, etc. are called postpositions because they follow nouns and
pronouns rather than precede them as in English.


Simple postpositions
Simple postpositions consist of one word. Here is the list of some
important simple postpositions.

  ka       ka   of (i.e. possessive marker)
  kao      ko   to; also object marker
  tk       tak  up to, as far as
  nao      ne   agent marker for transitive verbs in simple past,
                   present perfect and past perfect tenses
  pr       par on, at
  maoM     mg in
  sao      se   from, by, object marker for some verbs.
  vaalaa   vala -er (and wide range of meanings)

Two postpositions, ka ka and vaalaa vala, also change like green adject-
ives; all others act like red adjectives.


Compound postpositions
Compound postpositions consist of more than one word. They behave
exactly the same way as the simple postposition, i.e. they are the
source of peer pressure and thus require nouns or pronouns to be in
the oblique case. Examples of some of the most frequent compound
postpositions are given below:

  ko ke-type                           kI kc-type
  ko baaro maoM ke bare mg about       kI trf kc taraf towards
  ko Aagao ke age          in front of kI jagah kc jagah instead of
268                                                       Reference grammar


        ko saamanao   ke samne     facing         kI trh kc tara like
        ko phlao      ke pshle     before         kI bajaaya kc bajay instead of
        ko baad       ke bad       after
        ko naIcao     ke ncce      below
        ko }pr        ke epar      above

      Notice that most compound postpositions begin with either ko ke or
      kI kc but never with ka ka.


      Question words
      In English, the question words such as ‘who’, ‘when’ and ‘why’
      begin ‘wh-’ (exception ‘how’); Hindi question words begin with the
      k k- sound. Some of the most common question words are listed
      below:


      Pronouns
        @yaa      kya     what see pronouns for oblique forms
        kaOna     kaun    who   see pronouns for oblique forms
        kaOna–saa kaun-sa which kaOna kaun remains invariable but saa sa
                                            changes like the green adjectives


      Possessive pronouns

      See oblique + ka ka forms of @yaa kya and kaOna kaun in the section on
      pronouns.


      Adverbs
        kba           kab        when
        khaá          kahk       where
        @yaaoM        kyõ        why
        kOsaa         kssa       how, of what kind
        iktnaa        kitna      how much, how many

      The last two adverbs, kOsaa kssa and iktnaa kitna, are changeable and
      behave like the green adjectives.
Reference grammar                                                            269


Question words and word order
In Hindi it is not usual to move question words such as ‘what’, ‘how’
and ‘where’ to the beginning of the sentence. The question words
usually stay in their original position, i.e. somewhere in the middle
of the sentence. The only exception is the yes–no question, where the
Hindi question @yaa kya is placed at the beginning of the sentence.


Verbs
The concept of time is quite different in Hindi from the ‘unilinear’
concept of time found in English. In other words, time is not viewed
as smoothly flowing from the past through the present into the future.
It is possible to find instances of the present or future within the
past. For example, the English expression ‘he said that he was going’
will turn out to be ‘he said that he is going’ in Hindi. Similarly, the
concept of habituality is also different in Hindi. It is possible to say
in English ‘I always went there’; however, in Hindi one has to use
the past habitual instead of the English simple past to indicate a
habitual act. Therefore, the translational equivalent of the English
sentence ‘I always go there’ will be ‘I always used to go there’ in
Hindi.


Infinitive, gerundive or verbal nouns
naa na is suffixed to the verbal stem to form the infinitive (or ger-
undive or verbal noun) form of the verb. naa na follows the stem in
Hindi rather than preceding it.

Simple infinitive

Stem                      Stem + naa nA

pI pc                     pInaa pcna                    to drink, drinking
kr kar                    krnaa karna                   to do, doing
jaa ja                    jaanaa jana                   to go, going


The infinitive marker Aa a becomes e e in the oblique case (e.g. pInao sao
pcne se ‘by drinking’).
270                                                    Reference grammar


      Causative verbs
      Intransitive, transitive and detransitive verbs are made causative by
      a very productive process of suffixation. Two suffixes, Aa -a (called
      the ‘first causative’ suffix) and vaa -va (the ‘second causative’ suffix)
      are attached to the stem of a verb, and are placed before the infini-
      tive marker naa -na. The process of causativization brings about some
      changes in some stems (as in do de ‘to give’). Here are examples of
      some causative verb types:

      Type 1
      No changes occur in the verbal stem.

      Intransitive               Transitive               Causative

      ]D,naa uRna                ]D,anaa uRana            ]D,vaanaa uRvana
      to fly                     to fly x                 to cause y to fly x
      pknaa pakna                pkanaa pakana            pkvaanaa pakvna
      to be cooked               to cook x                to cause y to cook x


      Type 2
      The stem-vowel of the intransitive verb undergoes either a raising or
      a shortening process (shown in italics) in its corresponding transitive
      and causative forms.

      Intransitive           Transitive               Causative

      jaaganaa jAgna         jagaanaa  jagana         jagavaanaa jagvana
      to wake                to awaken x              to cause y to awaken x
      laoTnaa leTna          ilaTanaa li Tana         ilaTvaanaa li Tvana
      to lie down            to lay down              to cause y to lay down x
      JaUlanaa jhElna        Jaulaanaa jhulana        Jaulavaanaa jhulvana
      to swing               to swing x               to cause y to swing x


      Type 3
      The stem-vowel of the transitive verb undergoes either a raising or a
      shortening process in its corresponding intransitive and causative
      forms.
Reference grammar                                                                       271


    In cases where the stem is disyllabic, it is the second vowel that
undergoes such changes. The distinction between the causative marker
vaa -va and its corresponding transitive marker Aa -a is neutralized;
the two causal suffixes occur in free variation.


Type 3a

Intransitive           Transitive           Transitive (with Aa -A)/causative

marnaa   marna         maarnaa     mArna    maranaa/marvaanaa   marana/marvana
to die                 to kill              to cause y to kill x
ipsanaa pisna          pIsanaa  pCsna       ipsaanaa/ipsavaanaa pisana/pisvana
to be ground           to grind x           to cause y to grind x
pujanaa pEjna          pUjanaa pEjna        pujaanaa/pujavaanaa pujana/pujvana
to be worshipped       to worship x         to cause y to worship x
Kulanaa khulna         Kaolanaa kholna      Kulaanaa/Kulavaanaa khulana/khulvana
to be/become opened    to open x            to cause y to open x



Type 3b

Transitive verbs show one of the following tendencies: a new se-
mantic distinction between the derived and the base transitive forms
is created, as shown by the gloss in set A; or derived transitive and
causative verbs undergo one level of causativization, as is the case
with the set B.

Set A

Transitive               Transitive (with Aa -A)                Causative

pZ,naa    paRhna         pZ,anaa paRhana                        pZ,vaanaa paRhvana
to read                  to teach                               to cause y to teach x
baaolanaa bolna          baulaanaa bulana                       baulavaanaa bulvana
to speak                 to call                                to cause y to call x



Set B

The causative marker vaa -va occurs in free variation with laa -la. The
verbal stem undergoes vowel changes, as in
272                                                           Reference grammar


      Transitive              Transitive (with Aa -A)/causative

      donaa dena to give idvaanaa/idlaanaa divana/dilana        to cause y to give x
      Qaaonaa dhona to wash Qauvaanaa/Qaulaanaa dhuvana/dhulana to cause y to wash x


      Type 4
      Some verbs show both consonantal and vowel changes in their
      corresponding transitive forms. The consonantal alternations are
      as follows: the intransitive stem-final k k becomes ca c, and the
      intransitive stem-final T T becomes retroflex D, R.

      Intransitive          Transitive              Causative

      ibaknaa bikna         baocanaa becna          ibakvaanaa          bikvana
      to be sold            to sell x               to cause y to sell x
      TUTnaa TE Tna         taoD,naa toRna          tuD,anaa/tuD,vaanaa tuRaNa/tuRvaNa
      to be broken          to break x              to cause y to break x



      Auxiliary/copula verb
      Present
      The present tense auxiliary/copular verb agrees in number and
      person with its subject.

      haonaa hona ‘to be’

                         Singular                  Plural

      First person       hUá ho I am               hOM   hq      we are
      Second person      hO hs you are             hao   ho      you (familiar tuma) are
                                                   hOM   hq      you (honorific Aap) are
      Third person       hO hs he, she, it is      hOM   hq      they are


      Past
      The past tense auxiliary/copular verb agrees in number and gender
      with its subject.
Reference grammar                                                             273


haonaa hona ‘to be’

                        Singular                             Plural

Masculine               qaa    tha   was                     qao the were
Feminine                qaI    thc   was                     qaIM thm were

Another conjugation of haonaa hona is as follows:

                        Singular                             Plural

Masculine               huAa hua happened                    hue hue
Feminine                hu[- huc                             hu[- M hum


Future
The future tense auxiliary/copular verb agrees in number, gender
and person with its subject.

haonaa hona: masculine

                    Singular               Plural

First person        hUágaa hoga            haoMgao hõge
                    I will be              we will be
Second person       haogaa hoga            haogao hoge
                    you will be            you (familiar) will be
                                           haoMgao hõge
                                           you (AaPa ap, honorific) will be
Third person        haogaa hoga            haoMgao hõge
                    he/she/it will be      they will be


haonaa hona: feminine
For the feminine forms, replace the word-final vowel of the mascu-
line forms with [- c.

Subjunctive
For the subjunctive forms of haonaa hona, simply drop the final syllable
(i.e. gaa ga, gao ge, gaI gc) from the future tense forms.
274                                                       Reference grammar


      Main Verb
      Simple present/imperfective/present habitual

      The simple present is formed by adding the following suffixes to the
      main verbal stem:


                              Singular       Plural

      Masculine               -ta      -ta   -to -te
      Feminine                -tI      -tc   -tI -tc


      The main verb is followed by the present auxiliary forms.

      Example: verb stem ilaK likh ‘to write’
          Masculine

      Singular                                         Plural

      maOM ilaKta hUá   mq likhta ho                   hma ilaKto hOM   ham likhte hq
      I write                                          we write
      tU ilaKta hO      te likhta hs                   tuma ilaKto hao tum likhte ho
      you write                                        you (familiar) write
                                                       Aap ilaKto hOM ap likhte hq
                                                       you (honorific) write
      vah ilaKta hO vo likhta hs                       vao ilaKto hOM ve likhte hq
      he writes                                        they write


        Feminine
      Replace ta -ta and to -te in the masculine paradigm with tI -tc.

      Past habitual

      The past habitual is derived by substituting the past auxiliary forms
      for the present auxiliary forms in the simple present tense.
Reference grammar                                                                        275


Examples: verb stem ilaK likh ‘to write’
      Masculine

Singular                                            Plural

              mq likhta tha
maOM ilaKta qaa                                     hma ilaKto qao  ham likhte the
I used to write                                     we used to write
tU ilaKta qaa te likhta tha                         tuma ilaKto qao tum likhte the
you used to write                                   you (familiar) used to write
                                                    Aap ilaKto qao ap likhte the
                                                    you (honorific) used to write
vah ilaKta qaa vo likhta tha                        vao ilaKto qao  ve likhte the
he used to write                                    they used to write


   Feminine
Replace ta -ta and to -te in the masculine paradigm with tI -tc. Also
substitute the auxiliaries qaI thc and qaIM thm for qaa tha and qao the, respectively.

Simple past/perfective
The simple past is formed by adding the following suffixes to the
verb stem. No auxiliary verb follows the main verb.

                        Singular         Plural

Masculine               Aa -a            e -e
Feminine                [- -c            [- M -m

Example: verb stem baOz bsTh ‘sit’
      Masculine

Singular                                                        Plural

maOM baOza   mq bsTha                                           hma baOzo    ham bsThe
I sat                                                           we sat
tU baOza     te bsTha                                           tuma baOzotum bsThe
you sat                                                         you (familiar) sat
                                                                Aap baOzo ap bsThe
                                                                you (honorific) sat
vah baOza vo bsTha                                              vao baOzo ve bsThe
he sat                                                          they sat
276                                                                 Reference grammar


        Feminine
      The verb-final Aa a and e e are replaced by [- c and [- M m, respectively.

      Transitive verb and the agentive postposition nao ne
      Transitive verbs take the agentive postposition nao ne with the subject
      and the verb agreeing with the object instead of the subject. Observe
      the paradigm of the simple past tense with the transitive verb
      ilaK likh ‘to write’.
      Example: verb stem ilaK likh ‘to write’
          Masculine

      Singular                                      Plural

      maOMnao icaT\zI ilaKI   mqne ciTTh c likh c   hmanao icaT\zI ilaKI   hamne ciTTh c likh c
      I wrote a letter                              we wrote a letter
                       tene ciTTh c likh c
      tUnao icaT\zI ilaKI                           tumanao icaT\zI ilaKI tumne ciTTh c likh c
      you wrote a letter                            you (familiar) wrote a letter
                                                    Aapnao icaT\zI ilaKI apne ciTTh c likh c
                                                    you (honorific) write a letter
      ]sanao icaT\zI ilaKI usne ciTTh c likh c      ]nhaoMnao icaT\zI ilaKI unhõne ciTTh c likh c
      he wrote a letter                             they wrote a letter


      The verb agrees with icaT\zI ciTThc ‘letter’, which is a feminine sin-
      gular noun. Therefore the verb stays the same regardless of the
      change in the subject.
         Important transitive verbs which do not take the nao ne postposition
      are: imalanaa milna ‘to meet’, laanaa lana ‘to bring’ and baaolanaa bolna ‘to speak.’

          Default agreement
      The rule of thumb is that the verb does not agree with a constituent
      which is followed by a postposition. For example, if the object marker
      kao ko is used with icaT\zI ciTThc, the verb will agree with neither the
      subject nor the object. In such situations, the verb will stay in the
      masculine singular form.

      Present perfect
      Present perfect verbs are formed by adding the present tense auxil-
      iary forms to the simple past tense. Transitive verbs take the nao ne
      postposition with their subjects.
Reference grammar                                                     277


Example: verb stem baOz bsTh ‘to sit’

     Masculine

Singular                            Plural

            mq bsTha ho
maOM baOza hUá                      hma baOzo hOM  ham bsThe hq
I have sat (down)                   we have sat (down)
tU baOza hO te bsTha hs             tuma baOzo hao tum bsThe ho
you have sat (down)                 you (familiar) have sat (down)
                                    Aap baOzo hOM ap bsThe hq
                                    you (honorific) have sat (down)
vah baOza hO vo beTha hs            vao baOzo hOM  ve bsThe hq
he has sat (down)                   they have sat (down)



Past perfect

Past perfect verbs are formed by adding the past tense auxiliary
forms to the simple past tense. Transitive verbs take the nao ne
postposition with their subjects.

Example: verb stem baOz bsTh ‘to sit’

     Masculine

Singular                             Plural

maOM baOza qaamq bsTha tha           hma baOzo qao  ham bsThe the
I had sat (down)                     we had sat (down)
tU baOza qaa. te bsTha tha           tuma baOzo qao tum bsThe the
You had sat (down)                   you (familiar) had sat (down)
                                     Aap baOzo qao ap bsThe the
                                     you (honorific) had sat (down)
vah baOza qaa vo beTha tha           vao baOzo qao  ve bsThe the
he had sat (down)                    they had sat (down)



Future

The following person-number-gender suffixes with a stem form the
future tense.
278                                                        Reference grammar


      Pronouns                Singular                   Plural

                              Masculine     Feminine     Masculine        Feminine

      First person            }ágaa -oga    }ágaI -ogm   eágao    -gge    eágaI    -ggc
      Second person           egaa -ega     egaI -egc    Aaogao   -oge    AaogaI   -ogc
                                                         eágao    -gge    eágaI    -ggc
      Third person            egaa   -ega   egaI -egc    eágao    -gge    eágaI    -ggc


      Example: verb stem ilaK likh ‘to write’

           Masculine

      Singular                                            Plural

      maOM ilaKUágaa   mq likhoga                         hma ilaKoMgao  ham likhgge
      I will write                                        we will write
      tU ilaKogaate likhega                               tuma ilaKaogao tum likhoge
      you will write                                      You (familiar) will write
                                                          Aap ilaKoMgao ap likhgge
                                                          you (honorific) will write
      vah ilaKogaa vo likhega                             vao ilaKoMgao ve likhgge
      he will write                                       they will write


         Feminine
      Replace the last syllable gaa -ga and gao -ge in the masculine paradigm
      with gaI -gc.

      Subjunctive/optative

      The subjunctive (also called optative and hortative) is used to
      express suggestion, possibility, doubt, uncertainty, apprehension,
      wish, desire, encouragement, demand, requirement or potential. Sub-
      junctive forms are not coded for gender. Drop the gaa ga, gao ge and
      gaI gc endings from the future form, and the remainder will constitute
      the subjunctive form.

      Imperative

      The imperative is formed by adding the following endings to the
      stem:
Reference grammar                                                                 279


Intimate/impolite   Familiar Polite          Extra polite Future

no suffix           Aao -o      [e/[yao -iye [egaa -iyega naa -na (=infinitive)


Examples

   intimate/impolite         tU jaa         te ja          Go
   familiar                  tuma jaaAao    tum jao        Go
   polite                    Aap jaa[e      ap jaiye       (Please) go
   extra polite              Aap jaa[egaa   ap jaiyega     (Please) go
   future                    Aap jaanaa     ap/tum jana    (Please) go
      (non-immediate)                                        (sometime in
                                                             future)

Negative particles and the imperative

   nahIM nahm is not used with imperatives.
   mat mat is usually used with intimate, familiar and future
   imperatives.
   na na is usually used with polite, extra polite and future
   imperatives.

Present progressive/continuous

The progressive aspect is expressed by means of the independent
word rh rah, which is homophonous with the stem of the verb rhnaa
rahna ‘to live’. The progressive marker agrees with the number and
gender of the subject; therefore it can be realized in one of the
following three forms:

Progressive marker: rh rah ‘-ing’

Singular                                      Plural
Masculine              Feminine               Masculine              Feminine

rha raha               rhI rahc               rho rahe               rhIM rahm
280                                                                         Reference grammar


      Examples: verb stem ilaK likh ‘to write’
          Masculine

      Singular                                                    Plural

      maOM ilaK rha hUá    mq likh raha ho                        hma ilaK rho hOM   ham likh rahe hq
      I am writing                                                we are writing
      tU ilaK rha hO te likh raha hs                              tuma ilaK rho hao tum likh rahe ho
      you are writing                                             you (familiar) are writing
                                                                  Aap ilaK rho hOM ap likh rahe hq
                                                                  you (honorific) are writing
      vah ilaK rha hO vo likh raha hs                             vao ilaK rho hOMve likh rahe hq
      he is writing                                               they are writing


        Feminine
      Replace rha raha and rho rahe in the masculine paradigm with rhI rahc.

      Past progressive/continuous
      The present auxiliary verb in the present progressive construction is
      replaced by the past auxiliary verb (qaa tha ‘was’; qao the ‘were’; fem-
      inine qaI th c, qaIM th m) in the past progressive forms.

      Irregular verbs
      Here is a list of five Hindi irregular verbs in tense forms such as past,
      imperative and future:
          jaanaa          krnaa        laonaa             donaa              pInaa
          jana            karna        lena               dena               pcna
          to go           to do        to take            to give            to drink

      Simple past
          gayaa              ikyaa              ilayaa             idyaa             ipyaa
          gaya          kiya         liya          diya          piya
          went (m. sg.) did (m. sg.) took (m. sg.) gave (m. sg.) drank (m. sg.)
          gayao              ikyao              ilayao             idyao             ipyao
          gaye (m. pl.) kiye (m. pl.) liye (m. pl.)                diye (m. pl.) piye (m. pl.)
          gayaI              kI                 laI                dI                pI
          gayc (f. sg.)      kc (f. sg.)        lc (f. sg.)        dc (f. sg.)       pc (f. sg.)
          gayaIM             kIM                laIM               dIM               pIM
          gaym (f. pl.)      km (f. pl.)        lm (f. pl.)        dm (f. pl.)       pm (f. pl.)
Reference grammar                                                                                      281


Imperative

   (polite)              kIijae/kIijayao       laIijae/laIijayao   dIijae/dIijayao   pIijae/pIijayao
                         kcjiye                lcjiye              dcjiye            pcjiye
  (familiar)             regular               laao                dao               ipyaao
                                               lo                  do                piyo

Future

   laonaa      laUágaa               laaogao                        laogaa
   lena        loga                  loge                           lega
   to take     I will take           you (tuma) will take           will take (m. sg.)
               laoMgao
               lgge
               will take (m. pl.)
   donaa      dUágaa                daogao                         dogaa
   dena    doga                     doge                 dega
   to give I will give              you (tuma) will give will give (m. sg.)
              doMgao
              dgge
              will give (m. pl.)


Participles
Present/imperfective participle

The present participial marker is -t- which immediately follows the
verbal stem and is, in turn, followed by number and gender markers,
as shown below:

Masculine                                                     Feminine
Singular                       Plural                         Singular                  Plural

stem + ta                      stem + to                      stem + tI                 stem + tI
stem-t-a                       stem-t-e                       stem-t-c                  stem-t-c


The present participle may be used as either adjective or adverb. The
optional past participial form of the verb haonaa hona ‘to be’ may
immediately follow the present participial form. The forms of the
optional element are as follows:
282                                                           Reference grammar


      Masculine                                       Feminine
      Singular                  Plural                Singular                 Plural

      huAa                      hue                   hu[-                     hu[- M
      hua                       hue                   huc                      hum



      Examples

         calata (huAa) laD,ka     calta (hua) laRka          walking boy
         calatI (hu[-) laD,kI     caltc (huc) laRkc          walking girl

      The present participial form and the optional ‘to be’ form agree in
      number and gender with the following head noun. The retention of
      the optional form makes the participial phrase emphatic in nature.
      The present participle indicates an ongoing action.


      Past/perfective participle

      The past participial form is derived by adding the following suffixes,
      declined for number and gender, to the verbal stem. Like the present
      participle, the optional past participial form of the verb haonaa hona
      ‘to be’ may immediately follow the past participial form.


      Masculine                                      Feminine
      Singular                  Plural               Singular                Plural

      stem + a                  stem + o             stem + I                stem + I
      stem-a                    stem-e               stem-c                  stem-c



      The past participle may be used as either adjective or adverb.
      The past participial form and the optional ‘to be’ form agree in
      number and gender with the following head noun. The retention of
      the optional form makes the participial phrase emphatic in nature.
      The past participle indicates a state, as in

         baOzI ( huAa) laD,ka    bsTha (hua) laRka           a seated boy
         baOzI ( hu[-) laD,kI    bsThc (huc) laRkc           a seated girl
Reference grammar                                                                  283

The irregular past participle is formed the same way as the past
tense form.

Absolutive/conjunctive participle

The absolutive/conjunctive participle is formed by adding the invari-
able kr kar to the verbal stem, as in

Stem                                        Conjunctive participle

ilaK likh write                             ilaK kr likh kar having written
Aa a      come                              Aa kr a kar      having come
pI   pc   drink                             pI kr   pc kar   having drunk


to hI -te hc participle ‘as soon as’
This participle is formed by adding the invariable to hI -te hc ‘as soon
as’ to the verbal stem.

Stem                               ‘as soon as’ participle

ilaK likh write                    ilaKto hIo likhte hc as soon as (s/he) wrote
Aa a      come                     Aato hI ate hc as soon as (s/he) came
pI   pc   drink                    pIto hI    pcte hc as soon as (s/he) drank



Agentive participle

The agentive participle is formed by adding the marker vaalaa vala to
the oblique infinitive form of the verb. vaalaa vala agrees in number
and gender with the following noun.

Masculine                                      Feminine
Singular             Plural                    Singular              Plural

vaalaa vala          vaalao vale               vaalaI valc           vaalaI valc
284                                                        Reference grammar


      Examples

      Stem    Oblique infinitive   Agentive participle

      ilaK    ilaKnao              ilaKnao vaalaa laD,ka
      likh    likhne               likhne vala laRka           the boy who writes.
      write                        ilaKnao vaalao laD,ko
                                   likhane vale laRke          the boys who write.
                                   ilaKnao vaalaI laD,kI
                                   likhne valc laRkc           the girl who writes
                                   ilaKnao vaalaI laD,ikyaaá
                                   likhne valc laRkiyk the girls who write
Key to exercises                                      285




AByaasaÁ kuMjaI
abhyas: kuñjc
Key to exercises




ihndI laoKna AaOr ]ccaarNa hindc lekhan aur uccaraN
Hindi writing system and pronunciation
Exercise 1
1C      2A    3C     4B   5B

Exercise 2
1 A, D 2 B, D        3 A, B     4 B, C   5 B, D

Exercise 3
1   Tak      Tak       i.e. 1 B
2   zk       Thak      i.e. 2 B
3   Daga     Dag       i.e. 3 B
4   Qak      dhak      i.e. 4 A
5   pD,      paR       i.e. 5 B
6   sar      sar       i.e. 6 A
7   kZ,I     kaRhc     i.e. 7 B
8   zIk      Thck      i.e. 8 B

Exercise 4
1   kala     kal     i.e. 1 A
2   idna     din     i.e. 2 A
3   imala    mil     i.e. 3 A
4   caUk     cek     i.e. 4 B
5   maOla    msl     i.e. 5 B
286                                                               Key to exercises


      6   saor      ser       i.e. 6 A
      7   ibana     bin       i.e. 7 A
      8   bala      bal       i.e. 8 B


      phlaa paz – ilaip pshla paTh – lipi Script unit 1
      Exercise 1
      1 aman         2 asal      3 jalan      4 kalam           5 kamal      6 garam
      7 jab          8 kab       9 tab        10 sab

      Exercise 2
      ka, ya, tha, ta, gha, dha, bha, ma, va, ba

      Exercise 3
      1 K, r, va      2 z, t, z, qa      3 d, D, Qa, Z     4 p, f, ba, ya    5 r, D,, Z,

      Exercise 4
      1 kT         2 gala     3 cala      4 namak     5 sabak      6 prK      7 sadr
      8 calana     9 mana     10 pla     11 garma


      dUsara paz – ilaip desra paTh – lipi Script unit 2
      Exercise 1
      1 bharc          2 baRa              3 kitana        4 kala           5 bharat
      6 gaRc           7 kinara            8 gct           9 gayab          10 caval
      11 cahna         12 ciRiyaghar       13 zara         14 jcvan         15 japan
      16 cor           17 mor              18 phal         19 bhet          20 cauthau
      21 Daul          22 pulis            23 hathc        24 sitar         25 sham

      (Note: va is transcribed as v above.)

      Exercise 2
      1 jabaik     2 kI     3 baaj,aar 4 rajaa 5 ranaI 6 phcaana 7 na[-   8 banaarsa
      9 kanapur    10 maata 11 ipta 12 kBaI 13 imalana 14 ja,maIna 15 kar 16 mahInaa
      17 saala     18 idna 19 caar 20 saat 21 savaora 22 caaya 23 panaI 24 pit
      25 BaalaU    26 rat 27 daophr 28 Kaola 29 saaO   30 saaonaa
Key to exercises                                                            287


Exercise 3
1 ircaD-         2 ibala           3 saoyara      4 jaOinafr     5 Da^na

Exercise 4
àpyaa        Dr
$Ka          naama
kr           qaana
ik           Gar
AaOr         Dala

tIsara paz – ilaip tcsra paTh – lipi Script unit 3
Exercises 1–2
 1 qaanaa vahIM hO.
 2 Aap maorI madd kr sakto hMOÆ
 3 maOM vahaá kOsao jaa}áÆ
 4 yao maorI galatI nahIM.
 5 yahaá Ktra hO.
 6 bacaaAao!
 7 yah bahut j,a$rI hO.
 8 Dak–Kanaa khaá hOÆ
 9 iksa iKD,kI pr jaa}áÆ
10 iTkT iktnaa lagaogaaÆ
11 [-–maola AmarIka Baojanaa caahta hUá.
12 mauJao icanta /if,k` hO.

Exercise 3
1 Aa[e          2 AaAao            3 Ka[e        4 Ka laao     5 maa[k

Exercise 4
1 ha vs hk            2 he vs ho               3 hs vs hq      4 me vs mg


caaOqaa paz – ilaip cautha paTh – lipi Script unit 4
Exercise 1
 1 pUC–taC ka dF,tr.
 2 maOM rasta BaUla gayaI hUá,,.
288                                                              Key to exercises


       3 maOM rasta BaUla gayaa hUá,.
       4 tMga mat krao.
       5 maOM kuMjaI ZUMZ rha hUá.
       6 nahIM imala rhI.
       7 icaT\zI hvaa[- Dak sao Baoijayao.
       8 @yaa Aap yao saamaana saIQao bamba[- Baoja sakto hMOÆ
       9 samaana ko ilayao rsaId dIijayao.
      10 maora saamaana nahIM Aayaa.

      Exercise 2
       1 ham ek hafta dillc mg rahgge.
       2 mq yahk chuTTc par ho.
       3 ham yahk kam se aye hq.
       4 ye mera pasporT hs.
       5 kya is saman par DyeTc lagegc?
       6 ye cczg mere apne istemal ke liye hq.
       7 mere pas DyeTc vala saman nahm hs.
       8 mere pas kuch gifTs hq.
       9 is mg sirf kapRe aur kitabg hq.
      10 is ke alava koc aur ccz nahm hs.

      Exercise 4
      nokiya fon kc duniya mg apka svagat hs.
      hindc mg TskT mssej bhejie.
      pavar kuñjc                  nevc kuñjc
      haTag kuñjc                  skral kuñjc
      nambar kuñjiyk


      paácavaaá paz – ilaip pkcvk paTh – lipi Script unit 5
      Exercise 1
      1   a # i # ye
      2   aur # tg
      3   paRh # ta
      4   su # no
      5   na # mas # te
      6   mi # lg # ge
      7   sun # kar
      8   ad # mc
Key to exercises                                                                289


Exercise 3

     mausam              dillc               mumbac            kolkata

     tapman              das digrc sc        padrah digrc sc   solah digrc sc

     barsat              barish              badal             dhep

     hava                tez                 halkc             mand



Paaz          paTh ek Unit 1
Exercise 1
1 namasto. 2 zIk hO. 3 salaama. 4 Allaah ka Sauk` hO. 5 AcCa, namasto.
6 sat\ sa`I Akala hO. 7 maohrbaanaI hO or Allaah ka Sauk` hO. 8 namasto jaI.
9 hukma nahIMÊ ivanatI hO.
1 namaste 2 Thck hs. 3 salam 4 allaha ka shukra hs. 5 (accha),
namaste. 6 sat src akal jc. 7 meharbanc hs or (allah ka) shukra hs.
8 namaste jc. 9 hukam nahm, vintc hs.

Exercise 2
1    namasto.                           namasto.
2    @yaa hala hOÆ                      zIk hO
3    Aap ko imaj,aaja kOsao hOMÆ        Allaah ka Sauk hO.
4    Kuda haif,ja,                      Kuda haif,ja,.
5    saba KOiryat hOÆ                   maohrbaanaI hO.
6    salaama.                           salaama
1 namaste.                              namaste.
2 kya hal hs?                           Thck hs.
3 ap ke mizaj kaise hq?                 allah ka shukr hs.
4 xuda hafiz                            xuda hafiz.
5 sab xsriyat hs?                       meharbanc hs.
6 salam                                 salam.

Exercise 3
Conversation 1
A:     salaama .
B:     salaama.
290                                                          Key to exercises


      B:   saba KO,iryat hOÆ
      A:   maohrbaanaI hOÊ AaOr Aapko imaj,aaja kOsao hOMÆ
      B:   Allaah ka Sauk` hO.
      A:   salam.
      B:   salam.
      B:   sab xsriyat hs?
      A:   meharbanc hs, aur ap ke mizaj ksse hq?
      B:   allah ka shukr hs.

      Conversation 2
      A:   sat\ sa`I Akala jaI.
      B:   sat\ sa`I Akala jaI.
      B:   @yaa hala hOÆ
      A:   zIk hOÊ AaOr AapÆ
      B:   maOM BaI zIk hUá.
      A:   AcCaÊ sat\ sa`I Akala.
      B:   sat\ sa`I Akala.
      A:   sat src akal jc.
      B:   sat src akal jc.
      B:   kya hal hs?
      A:   Thck hs, aur ap?
      B:   mq bhc Thck hj.
      A:   accha, sat src akal.
      B:   sat src akal.

      Exercise 4
      1 savaala:         @yaa hala hOÆ
        javaaba:         zIk hO.
        savaala:         AaOr AapÆ
        javaaba:         maOM BaI zIk háU.
      2 savaala:         Aap kOsao hMOÆ
        javaaba:         zIk háU.
      1 Question:        kya hal hs?
        Answer:          Thck hs.
        Question:        aur ap?
        Answer:          mq bhc Thck hj.
      2 Question:        ap ksse hq?
        Answer:          Thck hj.
Key to exercises                                                                                           291


Exercise 5

    Long sentences                        Short sentences
1   AOar Aap kOsao hOMÆ                   kOsao hOMÆ
2   maMO BaI zIk hUá.                     zIk hUá.
3   AapkI maohrbaanaI hO.                 maohrbaanaI hO.
4   Aapko imaja,aja kOsao hMOÆ            imaj,aaja kOsao hOMÆ

1   aur ap ksse hq?                       ksse hq?
2   mq bhc Thck hj.                       Thck hj.
3   apkc meharbanc hs.                    meharbanc hq.
4   apke mizaj ksse hq?                   mizaj ksse hq?


Exercise 6

Most probably both are Hindus. ihndU hOM. hirde hq


Paaz          paTh do               Unit 2
Exercise 1

    maOM idllaI ka hUá. maoro caar Baa[- hOM. maora CaoTa Baa[- iSakagaao maoM kama krta hO. maoro dao
    baD,o Baa[- [MglaOD, maoM rhto hOM. maora naama Amar hO. maOM skUla jaata hUá. maorI dao bahnaoM BaI
    hOM.maoro ipta jaI BaI kama krto hOM. Aap khaá rhto hMOÆ Aapko iktnao Baa[-–bahnaoM hOM.
    AapkI maata jaI @yaa kama krtI hMO.
    mq dillc ka ho. mere car bhai hq. mera choTa bhac Chicago mg kam
    karta hs. mere do baRe bhac England mg rshte hq. mera nam
    amar hs. mq school jata ho. merc do bshsng bhc hq. mere pita jc bhc
    kam karte hq. ap kahã rshte hq? apke kitne bh ac-bshsng hq. apkc
    mata jc kya kam kartc hq?


Exercise 2

accha           bura             AcCa          baura
baRa            choTa            baD,a         CaoTa
bshsn           bhac             bahna         Baa[-
laRka           laRkc            laD,ka        laD,kI
admc            aurat            AadmaI        AaOrt
hk              nahm             haá           nahIM
292                                                          Key to exercises


      Exercise 3
      banaras       se             banaarsa sao
      shshsr        mg             Sahr maoM
      das           bshsng         dsa bahnaoM
      car           bhac           caar Baa[-
      do            admc           dao AadmaI
      kitne         bhac           iktnao Baa[-
      pclc          saRc           pIlaI saaD,I

      Exercise 4
      kahiye                 kihe
      xushc                  KuSaI
      baRc xushc huc         baD,I KuSaI hu[-
      pera nam               pUra naama
      desra                  dUsara
      kitne bhac             iktnao Baa[-
      milgge                 imalaoMgao

      Exercise 5
         a d g a b a d z             x s u n i y e z y x u f g
         l l k j a z x c             v b n ma s p q w e r t y
         z x c v R a d g             a r t y f g h a s g h j o
         r t y f i b g t             x u s h i i z q t s k x p
         c v b n i w s x             e d v r a t g h t a h z c
         q a z w c w s v             f r y h n mh u i k a u c

      Exercise 6
      Voices of two women: Abhilasha Pande and Meenu Bharati
      Setting: A crowded shop

      AiBalaaYaa:    (bumps into Meenu) maaf, kIijayao.
      maInaU:        maaf,I kI baat nahIM. bahut BaID, hO.
      AiBalaaYaa:    saca.
      maInaU:        maora naama maInaU BaartI hO.
      AiBalaaYaa:    AaOr maora naama AiBalaaYaa paáDo hO.
      maInaU:        maOM yahaá raoj,a AatI hUá.
      AiBalaaYaa:    Aap idllaI kI hOM naaÆ
      maInaU:        jaI haá.
Key to exercises                                                                           293


Abhilasha:         (bumps into Meenu) maf kcjiye.
Meenu:             maf kc bat nahm. bahut bhcR hs.
Abhilasha:         sac.
Meenu:             mera nam Meenu Bharati hs.
Abhilasha:         aur mera nam Abhilasha Pande hs.
Meenu:             mq yahk roz atc ho.
Abhilasha:         ap dillc kc hq na?
Meenu:             jc hk.


Paaz         paTh tcn            Unit 3
Exercise 1

1 mauJakao jayapur kI iTkT caaihyao/mauJakao jayapur ko ilayao iTkT caaihyao. variation:
  caaihyao = caaihe
2 @yaa Aapkao dvaa[- caaihyaoÆ
3 mauJakao dao Gar caaihyao.
4 mauJakao garaja maoM kar caaihyao.
5 Aapkao yah saundr saaD,I caaihyao.

1   mujhko jaipur kc TikaT cahiye/mujhko jaipur ke liye TikaT cahiye.
2   kya apko davac cahiye?
3   mujhko do ghar cahiye.
4   mujhko garage mg kar cahiye.
5   apko ye sundar saRc cahiye.

Exercise 2

1 maorI ek bahna hO.        2 maoro dao Baa[- hOM.     3 maoro pasa ek kmPyaUTr hO.
4 maora hala zIk hO.         5 mauJakao isar–dd- hO.   6 mauJakao kama caaihyao.
7 maora laD,ka Gar laota hO.

1 merc ek bshsn hs. 2 mere do bhac hq. 3 mere pas ek kampyuTar
hs. 4 mera hal Thck hs. 5 mujhko sir-dard hs. 6 mujhko kam
cahiye. 7 mera laRka ghar leta hs.

Exercise 3

mauJakao               bauK,ar hO.
maoro pasa             àpyao hOM.
294                                                              Key to exercises


      Aapko                Gar maoM iktnao AadmaI hOMÆ
      maora Sahr           bahut saundr hO.
      [h Flaa[-T           Aapko ilayao hO.
      [saka dama           @yaa hOÆ
      mujhko               buxar hs.
      mere pas             rupiye hq.
      apke                 ghar mg kinte admc hq?
      mera shshsr          bahut sundar hs.
      ye flight            apke liye hs.
      is ka dam            kya hs?

      Exercise 4

      Waiter: namasto.
      You:    namasto.
      Waiter: Aap kOsao hOMÆ
      You:    ( maOM) zIk hUá.
      Waiter: Aapkao maOnyaU caaihyaoÆ
      You:    nahIMÊ laMca ko ilayao spOSala @yaa hOÆ
      Waiter: laMca–spoSala SaakaharI (i.e. vegetarian) hO.
      You:    SaakaharI–spoSala zIk hO. vah @yaa hOÆ or
                   vaOjaIToiryana–spoSala zIk hO. yah @yaa hOÆ
      Waiter:      dalaÊ raoTIÊ rayataÊ sabj,aI AaOr caavala.
      You:         mauJakao dala j,ara masaalaodar caaihyao.
      Waiter:      zIk hO.
      Waiter: namaste.
      You:    namaste.
      Waiter: ap ksse hq?
      You:    (mq) Thck ho.
      Waiter: apko menu cahiye?
      You:    nahm, lunch ke liye special kya hs?
      Waiter: lunch-special shakaharc (i.e.vegetarian) hs.
      You:    shakaharc-special Thck hs. vo kya hs? or vegetarian-special
              Thck hs. ye kya hs?
      Waiter: dal, roTc, rayta, sabzc aur caval.
      You:    mujhko dal zara masaledar cahiye.
      Waiter: Thck hs.
Key to exercises                                                                                     295


Paaz           Unit 4
Exercise 1
    mauJakao pZ,naa psand hO. mauJakao @yaa psand hOÆ mauJakao @yaa–@yaa psand hO. mauJakao gaanao
    ka SaaOk hO. mauJakao tOrnao ka SaaOk hO. mauJakao Kanao ka SaaOk hO.
    mujhko paRhna pasand hs. mujhko kya pasand hs? mujhko kya-
    kya pasand hs? mujhko gane ka shauk hs. mujhko tsrne ka shauk
    hs. mujhko khane ka shauk hs.

By substituting Aapkao apko for mauJakao mujhko, you can generate six
more sentences.

Exercise 2
1   javaaba:    gaanao ko Alaavaa jaa^na kao naacanaa psand hO.
2   javaaba:    jaUDI kao khaainayaaá AaOr kivataeá ilaKnao ko / ka SaaOk hOM/ hO .
3   javaaba:    rmaoSa kao maugaa- Kanaa naapsand hO.
                rmaoSa kao maaásaaharI (or icakna) Kanaa naapsand hO.
                rmaoSa kao kivataeá naapsand hOM.
                rmaoSa kao doSaI–saMgaIt (or knT/I saMgaIt) naapsand hO.
4   javaaba:    rmaoSa kao samaaosaa Kanaa psand hO.
                rmaoSa kao SaakaharI (or vaOjaIToiryana) Kanaa psand hO.
                rmaoSa kao khaainayaaá psand hOM.
                rmaoSa kao BaartIya saMgaIt psand hO.
                rmaoSa kao BaartIya (or ihndustanaI) saMgaIt psand hO.
1 gane ke alava John ko nacna pasand hs.
2 Judy ko kahaniyk aur kavitag likhne ka shauk hs. or
  Judy ko kahaniyk aur kavitag likhne ke shauk hq.
3 Ramesh ko murga (or chicken) khana napasand hs.
  Ramesh ko non-vegetarian (or mksaharc) khana napasand hs.
  Ramesh ko kavitag napasand hq.
  Ramesh ko deshc sargct (or country music) napasand hs.
4 Ramesh ko samosa khana pasand hs.
  Ramesh ko shakaharc (or vegetarian) khana pasand hs.
  Ramesh ko kahaniyk pasand hq.
  Ramesh ko bhartcya (or hindustAnC/Indian) sargct pasand hs.

Exercise 3
1 John likes to eat/eating.                     John likes food.
2 John likes to sing/singing.                   John likes (the) song.
296                                                                   Key to exercises


      Exercise 4 (examples)
         x krnao sao manaa krnaa. ]na ka khnaa (ik) kmara saaf, krao.

         x karne se mana karna (to prohibit from doing x); unka kshna:
         kamra saf karo (their saying: clean your room).

      Exercise 5
         mauJakao tOrnao ka SaaOk hO. mauJakao tOrnaa psand hO. mauJakao tOrnaa AcCa lagata hO.
         Variation: mauJakao = mauJao

         mujhko tsrne ka shauk hs. mujhko tsrna pasand hs. mujhko tsrna
         accha lagta hs.

      Exercise 6
      1 cats                          ibaillayaaá
      2 dogs                          ku<ao
      3 spicy foods                   masaalaodar Kanaa
      4 cricket (game)                ikkoT
      5 bharatnaTayam                 BartnaaT\yama\
      6 rock music                    ra^k saMgaIt

      Paaz         Unit 5
      (If you are female, the final vowel of the verb forms given in italics
      needs to be replaced by the vowel [- c.)

      maora naama x hO.
      (number) idna Aagara rhUá gaa.
      idllaI AaOr Aagara jaa}á gaa.
      yah idllaI (x Sahr) ka pta hO.
      fill out the address.
      (number) idnaaoM ko baad.
      (or x (number) tarIK, kao).
      jaI nahIM.
      mera nam x hs.
      (number) din rahogA.
      dillc aur agra jaogA.
      ye dillc (x city) ka pata hs:
      (fill out the addresss)
Key to exercises                                                                                       297


(number) dinõ ke bad.
(or x (number) tarcx ko).
jc nahm.


Exercise 2

  maOM Aapko ilayao @yaa kr sakta hUáÆ hma Aagara jaanaa caahto hOMÆ Aagara iktnaI dUr hOÆ
  bahut dUr nahIMÊ laoikna Aap kba jaa rho hOMÆ hma kla jaaeágao. gaaD,I saubah idllaI sao
  calatI hO. Aap gaaD,I sao jaanaa caahto hOMÆ
  mq apke liye kya kar sakta ho? ham agra jana cahte hq. agra kitnc
  der hs? bahut der nahm, lekin ap kab ja rahe hq? ham kal jagge.
  gaRc suba dillc se caltc hs. ap gaRc se jana cahte hq?


Exercise 3

  iPa`ya rakoSa
  tumhara K,t imalaa. pZ, kr KuSaI hu[-. tuma kba Aa rho haoÆ kla maOM iSakagaao jaa rha
  hUá. iSakagaao bahut baD,a Sahr hO. maOM iSakagaao hvaa[- jahaja,sao jaa}ágaa. laoikna maOM hvaa[-
  jahaja, sao nahIM jaanaa caahta hUá. gaaD,I mauJao hvaa[- jahaja, sao j,yaada psand hO. baakI saba
  zIk hO.
                                            tumhara daostÊ
                                               rajaIva.
  Priya Rakesh:
  tumhara xat mila. paRh kar xushc huc. tum kab a rahe ho? kal mq
  Chicago ja raha ho. Chicago bahut baRa shshsr hs. mq Chicago
  hawac jahaz (airplane) se jaoga. lekin mq hawac jahaz se nahm jana
  cahta ho. gaRc mujhe hawac jahaz se zyada pasand hs. bakc sab
  Thck hs.
                            tumhara dost,
                                Rajcv


Exercise 4

  Aap khaá jaa rhI hOMÆ Aap yahaá iktnao idna rhoMgaIÆ Aap iksa ka kama kr rhI hOMÆ
  @yaa Aapkao caaya bahut psand hOÆ Aapko iktnao Baa[- hOMÆ
  ap kahk ja rahc hq. ap yahk kitne din rahggc? ap kiska kam kar
  rahc hq? kya apko cay bahut pasand hs? apke kitne bhac hq?
298                                                                           Key to exercises


      Exercise 5

          Agar mauJakao ek imailayana Da^lar imalaoMgaoÊ tao maOM duinayaa ka saf,r kàágaa/ kàágaI. rajaa/
          ranaI kI trh rhUágaa/ rháUgaI. Apnao ilayao ek naava AaOr raolsa raysa K,rIdUágaa/ KrIdUágaI.
          ApnaI p%naI / Apnao pit ko ilayao hIro K,rIdUágaa /K,rIdUágaI. laoikna KuSaI sao pagala
          nahIM hao jaa}ágaa/ jaa}ágaI . kuC dor ko baad ApnaI naaOkrI krnao ja$r jaa}ágaa/
          jaa}ágaI.
          agar mujhko ek million dollars milgge, to mq duniya ka safar
          karoga/karogc. raja/ranc kc tarah rahoga/rahogc. apne liye ek nav
          aur Rolls Royce xarcdoga /xarcdogc. apnc patnc/ apne pati ke liye
          hcre xarcdoga/xarcdogc. lekin xushc se pagal nahm ho jaoga/jaogc,
          kuch der ke bad apnc naukrc karne zarer jaoga/jaogc.

      Exercise 6

          hma raobaat hOM. hma kOila,f,aoina-yaa sao hOM. hma ihndI baaola sakto hOM. hma ihndI samaJa BaI
          sakto hOM.hma ihndI gaanao gaa sakto hOM . hmaarI maOmaaorI bahut baD,I hO. hma hr savaala pUC
          sakto hOM AaOr hr javaaba do sakto hOM. yaanaI hr kama kr sakto hOM.hma hmaoSaa kama kr
          sakto hOM.hma kBaI nahIM qakto hOM. hmaaro pasa hr savaala ka javaaba hO. laoikna
          masaalaodar Kanaa nahIM Ka sakto (hOM).
          ham Robot hq. ham California se hq. ham hindc bol sakte hq. ham
          hindc samajh bhc sakte hq. ham hindc gane ga sakte hq. hamarc
          memory bahut baRc hs. ham har saval pech sakte hq aur har
          javab de sakte hq. yanc har kam kar sakte hq. ham hamesha kam
          kar sakte hq. ham kabhc nahm thakte hq. hamare pas har saval ka
          javab hs. lekin masaledar khana nahm kha sakte.

      Exercise 7

      1   ismaqa ima· AmarIka Agalao mahInao jaaeágao (jaayaoMgao).
      2   vao iba`iTSa eyarvaoj,a sao nyaU yaa^k- jaaeágao (jaayaoMgao).
      3   jaI nahIM.
      4   @yaaMoik vao Apnao baccaaoM kao iDj,naI vaD- idKanaa caahto hOM.
      5   vao iDj,naI vaD- saat idna (or ek hF,ta) rhoMgao.
      1 Smith jc America agle mahcne jagge.
      2 ve British Airways se New York jagge.
      3 jc nahm.
      4 kyõki ve apne baccõ ko Disney World dikhana cahte hq.
      5 ve Disney World sat din (or ek hafta) rahgge.
Key to exercises                                                                                           299


Paaz           Unit 6
Exercise 1
    maoro daostÊ vao idna iktnao AcCo qaoÑ maOMnao saaocaa vao idna hmaoSaa rhoMgao. vao idna bacapna ko
    idna qao. maOM hmaoSaa Kolata qaa AaOr naacata qaa . hr caIj,a saundr qaI. hr idna nayaa qaa
    AaOr hr rat ka Andaj,a qaa. Aba vao idna nahIM rho.
    mere dost, ve din kitne acche the! mqne soca ve din hamesha rahgge.
    ve bacpan ke din the. mq hamesha khelta tha aur nacta tha. har ccz
    sundar thc. har din naya tha aur har rat ka andaz tha. ab ve din
    nahm din rahe.

Exercise 2
1   maOM vahaá gayaI.
2   ]sanao mauJakao batayaa.
3   hma Gar Aayao.
4   tuma Gar dor sao phuácao.
5   ]nhaoMnao puilasa kao irpao-T kI.
6   Aapkao yah iktaba kba imalaI.
1   mq vahk gayc.
2   usne mujhko bataya.
3   ham ghar aye.
4   tum ghar der se pahjce.
5   unhõne police ko report kc.
6   apko ye kitab kab milc.

Exercise 3

1   Aapko maata–ipta ka janma khaá huAaÆ
2   Aapko maata–ipta ka janma kba huAaÆ
3   @yaa ]naka pirvaar AmaIr qaa yaa g,arIba qaaÆ
4   ]nakI SaadI kba hu[-Æ
5   ]nakI ]mar iktnaI qaI jaba ]nakI SaadI hu[-Æ
6   ]nakI ArOMjD maOirja hu[- yaa lava maOirjaÆ
7   @yaa AapkI maaá Aapko ipta sao CaoTI hOMÆ
1 apke mata-pita ka janma kahk hua?
2 apke mata-pita ka janma kab hua?
3 kya unka parivar amcr tha ya garcb tha?
300                                                                              Key to exercises


      4   unkc shadc kab huc?
      5   unkc umar kitnc thc jab unkc shadc huc?
      6   unkc arranged marriage huc ya love marriage?
      7   kya apkc mk ap ke pita se choTc hq?

      Exercise 4

      1   kla iksaka janma idna qaaÆ
      2   iksako pirvaar nao ek paTI- kIÆ
      3   vah paTI- kba hu[-Æ
      4   jaana kao iksako baaro maoM maalaUma nahIM qaaÆ
      5   yah kOsaI paTI- qaIÆ
      6   jaa^na ka janma idna kba qaaÆ
      1   kal kiska janma din tha?
      2   kiske parivar ne ek party kc?
      3   vo party kab huc?
      4   John ko kiske bare mg malem nahm tha?
      5   ye kssc party thc?
      6   John ka janma din kab tha?

      Exercise 5

      1 saca        2 JaUz           3 JaUz           4 JaUz            5 saca     6 saca   7 saca
      1 sac         2 jheT           3 jheT           4 jheT            5 sac      6 sac    7 sac

      1   puranao ja,maanao maoM AadmaI Gar maoM kama nahIM krto qao.
      2   Aaja–kla saara pirvaar TIvaI doKta hO.
      3   Aaja–kla AadmaI AaOr AaOrtoM Kanaa banaato hOM.
      1 purane zamane mg admc ghar mg kam nahm karte the.
      2 aj-kal sara parivar TV dekhta hs.
      3 aj-kal admc aur auratg khana banate hq.


      paz           Unit 7
      Exercise 1

      1   mauJakao isatar AatI hO.
      2   @yaa Aap tOr sakto hOMÆ
      3   ]sakao khaá jaanaa pD,ta hO.
Key to exercises                                                                 301


4   ]nhaoMnao saMgaIt kba saIKaÆ
5   vah saolj,amaOna hO. ]sakao baahr jaanaa pD,ta hO.
6   jaa^na kao bahut kama hO. [sailayao ]sakao kuC fursat nahIM hO.
1 mujhko sitar atc hs.
2 kya ap tsr sakte hq?
3 usko kahk jana hs?
4 unhõne sargct kab sckha?
5 vo salesman hs. usko bahar jana paRta hs.
6 John ko bahut kam hs. isliye usko kuch fursat nahm hs.

Exercise 2
1   ibala kao jaldI hO @yaaoMik ]sakI gaaD,I dsa imanaT maoM jaanao vaalaI hO.
2   D/a[var jaldI kraoÊ maoro daost kI F,laa[T Aanao vaalaI hO.
3   sardI ka maaOsama qaaÊ jaldI barf, igarnao vaalaI qaI.
4   paTI- ko ilayao maohmaana phuácanao vaalao hOM.
5   Saama ka samaya qaaÊ AnQaora haonao vaalaa qaa.
6   Aap kBaI ihndustana gayao hOMÆ
1   Bill ko jaldc hs kyõki uskc gaRc das minute mg jane valc hs.
2   Driver jaldc karo, mere dost kc flight ane valc hs.
3   sardc ka mausam tha, jaldc barf girne valc thc.
4   party ke liye mshman pahjcne vale hq.
5   sham ka samay tha, andhra hone vala tha.
6   ap kabhc hindustan gaye hq?

Exercise 3
1   AQyaapk            ]sakao pZ,anaa hO.
2   Da^@Tr             ]sakao marIj,a kao doKnaa hO.
3   gaayak             ]sakao gaanaa hO.
4   D/a[var            ]sakao kar calaanaI hO.
5   QaaobaI            ]sakao kpD,o Qaaonao hOM.
6   laoKk              ]sakao ilaKnaa hO.
1 adhyapak             usko paRhana hs.
2 Doctor               usko marcz ko dekhna hs.
3 gayak                usko gana hs.
4 Driver               usko kar calanc hs.
5 dhobc                usko kapRe dhone hq.
6 lekhak               usko likhna hs.
302                                                                                Key to exercises


      Exercise 4

      1   @yaa Aap maoro ilae irkaomaOMDoSana laOTr ilaK dMogaoÆ
      2   rat AayaI AaOr AMQaora hao gayaa qaa.
      3   maOM ihndI nahIM pZ, saktaÊ Aap yao Kt pZ, dIijayao .
      4   vaao qaaoD,a qaaoD,a tOr sakta /laota hO.
      5   ]sakao bahut AcCa naacanaa Aata hO.
      6   maOM AapkI baat ibalkula BaUla gayaa.

      1   kya ap mere liye recommendation letter likh dgge?
      2   rat ayc aur andhera ho gaya tha.
      3   mq hindc nahm paRh sakta, ap ye xat paRh dcjiye.
      4   vo thoRa thoRa tsr sakta/leta hs.
      5   usko bahut accha nacna ata hs.
      6   mq ap kc bat bilkul bhel gaya.

      Exercise 5

          bacapna maoM mauJao dUQa pInaa pD,ta qaa. bacapna maoM Da^@Tr ko pasa jaanaa pD,ta qaa. bacapna
          maoM mauJao dvaa[- pInaI pD,tI qaI. bacapna maoM mauJao TIka lagavaanaa pD,ta qaa. bacapna maoM mauJao
          maata–ipta ko saaqa caIj,aoM KrIdnao jaanaa pD,ta qaa.
          bacpan mg mujhe dedh pina paRta tha. bacpan mg mujhe doctor ke
          pas jana paRta tha. bacpan mg mujhe davac pcnc paRtc thc. bacpan
          mg mujhe Tika lagvana paRta tha. bacpan mg mujhe mata-pita ke
          sath cczg xarcdne jana paRta tha.

      Exercise 6

      1 JaUz        2 saca         3 JaUz        4 JaUz         5 saca         6 JaUz         7 saca
      1 jh          2s             3 jh          4 jh           5s             6 jh           7s


      Paaz           Unit 8
      Exercise 1

          Aa[yaoÊ tSarIf, riKyao. tklaIf, kI baat @yaa hOÆ Saayad Aapkao dF,tr maoM kama
          j,yaada hao. vah Aapka [ntjaar kr rhI qaI. Aadaba Aj,a- hO.
          aiye, tashrcf rakhiye. taklcf kc bat kya hs? shayad apko daftar mg
          kam zyada ho. vo apka intazar kar rahc thc. adab arz hs.
Key to exercises                                             303


Exercise 2
1   maaf, kIijayaoÊ maOM caOk Baojanaa BaUla gayaa.
2   maMOnao Kanaa Ka ilayaa.
3   Aapka bauKar baZ, gayaa.
4   Aapnao kuC j,avaaba nahIM idyaa.
5   Aap maorI salaah maana laIijayao.
1   maf kcjiye, mq cheque bhejna bhel gaya.
2   mqne khana kha liya.
3   apka buxar baRh gaya.
4   apne kuch javab nahm diya.
5   ap merc salah man lcjiye.

Exercise 3
1   AQyaapk                         Ca~aoM kao pZ,ata hO.
2   Da^@Tr                          TIka lagaata hO.
3   kOiSayar                        caOk kOSa krta hO.
4   dj,aI-                          kpD,o banaata hO.
5   Kanasaamaa                      Kanaa banaata hO.
6   D/a[var                         kar calaata hO.
7   isaivala [Mijainayar            [maartoM banavaata hO.
1 adhyapak                          chatrõ ko paRhata hs.
2 DakTar (doctor)                   Tcka lagata hs.
3 cashier                           cheque cash karta hs.
4 darzc                             kapRe banata hs.
5 khansama                          khana banata hs.
6 driver                            kar calata hs.
7 civil engineer                    imaratg banvata hs.

Exercise 4
1   Syaama nao ihlDa sao ApnaI kar calavaayaI.
2   Syaama ihlDa sao Apnaa K,t ilaKvaayaogaa.
3   Syaama ihlDa sao Apnaa Gar banavaa rha hO.
4   Syaama ihlDa sao ApnaI khanaI saunavaa rha hO.
5   Syaama ihlDa sao ApnaI laD,kI kao pZ,vaata hO.
1 Shyam:           shyam ne hilDa se apnc kar calvayc.
2 Shyam:           shyam hilDa se apna xat likhvayega.
3 Shyam:           shyam hilDa se apna ghar banva raha hs.
304                                                                         Key to exercises


      4 Shyam:          shyam hilDa se apnc kahanc sunva raha tha.
      5 Shyam:          shyam hilDa se apnc laRkc ko paRhvata hs.

      Exercise 5
      1   hásanaa:             mauJao vah hásatI laD,kI bahut psand hO.
      2   Kolanaa:             Kolato baccao bahut saundr laga rho qao.
      3   gaanaa:              gaatI icaiD,yaa ]D, rhI qaI.
      4   isatar bajaanaa:     isatar bajaata AadmaI bahut AcCa hO.
      5   tOrnaa:              tOrtI maCilayaaoM kao doKao.
      6   raonaa:              Da^@Tr nao raoto baccao kao TIka lagaayaa.
      1   hãsna:               mujhe vo hãstc laRkc bahut pasand hs.
      2   khelna:              khelte bacce bahut sundar lag rahe the.
      3   gana:                gatc ciRiya uR rahc thc.
      4   sitar bajana:        sitar bajata admc bahut accha hs.
      5   tsrna:               tsrtc machaliyõ ko dekho.
      6   rona:                Doctor ne rote bacce ko Tcka lagaya.

      Exercise 6
          maOM rolavao sToSana prApnao daost ka [Mtj,aar kr rha qaa. qaaoD,I dor baad gaaD,I AayaI AaOr
          maora daost gaaD,I sao ]tra. hma bahut KuSa hao kr imalao. [sa baar paáca saala ko baad
          hmaarI maulaakat hu[-. qaaoD,I dor baad maOMnao khaÊ ‘[sa baar bahut dor ko baad yahaá Aayao
          hao’.]sanao javaaba idyaaÊ ‘AcCI baat qaI ik Agar gaaD,I dor sao na AatIÊ tao maOM Aaja BaI
          na Aata’.
          mq railway station par apne dost ka intzar kar raha tha. thoRc der
          bad gaRhc ayc aur mera dost gaRhc se utra. ham bahut xush ho
          kar mile. is bar pkc sal ke bad hamarc mulakat huc. thoRc der bad
          mqne kaha, ‘is bar bahut der ke bad yahk aye ho’. usne javab
          diya, ‘acchc bat thc ki agar gaRhc der se na atc, to mq aj bhc na ata’.


      Paaz          Unit 9
      1   laaoga laaáD/ImaOT kpD,o Qaaonao jaato hMO.
      2   laaoga rOsTaorOMT Kanaa Kanao jaato hOM.
      3   laaoga maUvaI iqaeTr iflma doKnao jaato hOM.
      4   laaoga ka^ilaja pZ,nao jaato hOM.
      5   laaoga isvaimaMga pUla tOrnao jaato hOM.
      6   laaoga baar ibayar pInao jaato hOM.
      7   laaoga famao-saI dvaa[- laonao jaato hOM.
Key to exercises                                  305


1 log laundrymat kapRe dhone jate hq.
2 log restaurant khana khane jate hq.
3 log movie theatre film dekhne jate hq.
4 log college paRhne jate hq.
5 log swimming pool tsrne jate hq.
6 log bAr beer pcne jate hq.
7 log pharmacy davac lene jate hq.

Exercise 2
1   vah baOzo hue baaolaa.
2   jaa^na saaoyao hue hása rha qaa.
3   yah Sahr saaoyaa saa lagata hO.
4   laD,kI raoyaI hu[- Gar AayaI .
5   AaOrt nao isvaimaMga pUla pr laoTo hue kha.
1   vo bsThe hue bola.
2   John so(y)e hue has raha tha.
3   ye shshsr sotya sa lagta hs.
4   laRkc royc huc ghar ayc.
5   aurat ne swimming pool par leTe hue kaha.

Exercise 3
    saunaI        baat
    ilaKa         Kt
    hásata        laD,ka
    calatI        gaaD,I
    BaUlao        laaoga
    Baagato       iballaI
    sunc          bat
    likha         xat
    hãsta         laRka
    caltc         gaRc
    bhele         log
    bhagtc        billc

Exercise 4
1   jaa^na sao ek khanaI pZ,I gayaI.
2   hma laaogaaoM sao Kanaa Kayaa jaa rha hO.
306                                                                        Key to exercises


      3   tumasao @yaa ikyaa jaayaogaaÆ
      4   mauJasao icakna krI banaayaI gayaI.
      5   ibala sao yah pZ,a jaayaogaa.
      6   @yaa Aapsao gaanaa gaayaa gayaaÆ
      1 John se ek kahanc paRhc gayc.
      2 ham logõ se khana khaya ja raha hs.
      3 tumse kya kiya jayega?
      4 mujh se chicken curry banayc gayc.
      5 Bill sg ye paRha jayega.
      6 kya apse gana gaya gaya?

      Exercise 5

      1   hmakao vahaá jaanao ka maaOka imalaa.
      2   jaa^na kao ihndustana jaanao ka maaOka A@sar imalata hO.
      3   yah saunahra maaOka qaa.
      4   Aapkao iktaba ilaKnao ka maaOka kba imalaogaaÆ
      5   [sa kagaj,a maoM @yaa ilaKa hOÆ
      6   iballaI kao maaOka imalaa AaOr vah dUQa pI gayaI.
      7   yah bahut AcCo maaOko kI baat hO.
      1   hamko vahk jane ka mauka mila.
      2   John ko hindustan jane ka mauka aksar milta hs.
      3   ye sunhsra mauka tha.
      4   apko kitab likhne ka mauka kab milega?
      5   is kagaz mg kya likha hs?
      6   billc ko mauka mila aur vo dudh pc gayc.
      7   ye bahut acche mauke kc bat hs.


      Paaz           Unit 10
      Exercise 1

      dIvaalaI                idyao jalaayao jaato hOM.
                              pTaKo, calaayao jaato hOM.
                              rajaa rama ko Apnao rajya laaOTnao kI KuSaI maoM manaayaa jaata hO.
      haolaI                  Sa~uAaoM kao BaI ima~ banaayaa jaata hO.
                              gaulaala lagaayaa jaata hO.
                              rMga sao Kolaa jaata hO.
      rxaabanQana             Qaagaa baaáQaa jaata hO.
Key to exercises                                                        307


dcvalc        diye jalaye jate hq.
              paTaxe calaye jate hq.
              raja ram ke apne rajya lauTane kc xushc mg manaya
              jata hs.
holc          shatruõ ko bhc mitra banaya jata hs.
              gulal lagaya jata hs.
              rarga se khela jata hs.
rakshaband an dhaga bkdha jata hs.
          h




Exercise 2

1   Enemies are also made friends.
2   Lamps are lit.
3   The thread is tied.
4   Fire crackers are lit.
5   Gulal is used.
6   (It) is played with colour.
7   (It) is celebrated in the happiness of the return of King Rama to
    his kingdom.


Exercise 3

1   dIvaalaI      dcvalc
2   rxaabanQana   rakshabandhan
3   rxaabanQana   rakshabandhan
4   haolaI        holc
5   dIvaalaI      dcvalc
308                                                      Key to exercises




      SabdkaoYa k`ma
      shabadkosh kram
      Dictionary order




      The dictionary order of Devanagari script is given below, working
      vertically down the columns. The nasalized vowels precede the oral
      vowels. The conjunct forms of a consonant (non-syllabic) follow all
      the syllabic forms. Thus, Aaá k precedes Aa a, whereas the non-syllabic
      form @ k follows kaO kau. The Sanskrit letters xa ksha, ~ tra and & gya
      follow @ k, t\ t and j j, respectively.


      A     a         k/k,     ka/qa        z      Tha             ba   ba
      Aa    a         K/K,     kha/xa       D/D,   Da/Ra           Ba   bha
      [     i         ga/ga,   ga/Ga        Z/Z,   Dha/Rha         ma   ma
      [-    c         Ga       gha          Na     Na              ya   ya
      ]     u         =        ra           t      ta              r    ra
      }     e         ca       ca           qa     tha             la   la
      ?     ri        C        cha          d      da              va   wa/va
      e     e         ja/j,a   ja/za        Qa     dha             Sa   sha
      eo    s         Ja       jha          na     na              Ya   SHa
      Aao   o         Ha       ña           p      pa              sa   sa
      AaO   au        T        Ta           f/f,   pha/fa          h    ha
English–Hindi glossary                                                     309




maUla SabdavalaI
argrezc-hindc
shabdavalc
English–Hindi glossary




Some basic vocabulary useful for everyday communication is given
below. The vocabulary is presented in the following groups:

•   body, health and ailments
•   colours
•   family and relatives
•   food and drink
•   numbers
•   time
•   important verbs

The gender of the nouns is specified as masculine (m.) and feminine
(f.). Adjectives are given in their base masculine singular form. Since
the plural forms of the nouns are predictable from the gender, only
the singular forms are listed. Verbs are specified for the agentive
(+/–nao ne; in perfective tenses) and experiential subjects (+kao ko) if
they fail to select the regular nominative subjects. Also, if the object
of a verb takes a specific postposition instead of the regular kao ko
postposition, it is specified in the following way:

    wait [Mtja,ar krnaa   x ka intzar karna    ‘to wait for x’

This shows that the verb [Mtja,ar krnaa intzar karna ‘to wait’ takes the
ka ka ‘of’ postposition instead of kao ko or the equivalent of the
English ‘for’. Verbs are listed in the infinitive form.
310                                                          English–Hindi glossary


      Body, health and ailments
      Parts of the body and appearance
      ankle          eD,I                   eRc (f.)
      back           pIz                    pcTh (f.)
      bald           gaMjaa                 ganja (m.)
      beard          daZ,I                  daRhc (f.)
      blood          lahUÊ KUna             lahe (m.), xen (m.)
      body           SarIrÊ ijasma          sharcr (m.), jisma (m.)
      chest          CatI                   chatc (f.)
      ear            kana                   kan (m.)
      elbow          kaohnaI                kohnc (f.)
      eye            AaáK                   kkh (f.)
      face           caohraÊ mauáh          cehra (m.), mjh (m.)
      finger         ]MgalaI                urglc (f.)
      foot           pOr                    psr (m.)
      forehead       maaqaa                 matha (m.)
      hair           baala                  bal (m.)
      hand           haqa                   hath (m.)
      head           isar                   sir (m.)
      heart          idla                   dil (m.)
      kidney         gauda-                 gurda (m.)
      knee           GauTnaa                ghuTna (m.)
      leg            laatÊ Taága            lat (f.), Tkg (f.)
      lip            haMoz                  hõTh (m.)
      moustache      maUáC                  moch (f.)
      mouth          mauáh                  mjh (m.)
      neck           galaa                  gardan (f.)
      nose           naak                   nak (f.)
      shoulder       kMQaa                  kandha (m.)
      stomach        poT                    peT (m.)
      throat         galaa                  gala (m.)
      thumb          AMgaUza                argeTha (m.)
      toe            pOr kI ]MgalaI         psr kc urglc (f.)
      tongue         jaIBaÊ ja,baana        jcbh (f.), zaban (f.)


      Health and ailments
      ache, pain               dd-                   dard (m.)
      ailment, sickness        baImaarI/ibamaarI     bcmarc/bimarc (f.)
English–Hindi glossary                                                       311


appetite, hunger              BaUK               bhekh (f.)
blind                         AnQaa              andha (m.)
blister                       Calaa              chala (m.)
boil                          faoD,a             phoRa (m.)
breath                        saaása             sks (f.)
burning sensation             jalana             jalan (f.)
cholera                       hOj,aa             hsza (m.)
common cold                   jauk,ama           zukam (m.)
cough                         #aaásaI            khksc (f.)
deaf                          bahra              bshra (m.)
defecation                    T+I Aanaa          TaTTc ana (+ko)
dumb                          gaUágaa            goga (m.)
dysentry                      poicaSa            pecish (f.)
feeling breathless            saaása caZ,naa     sks caRhna (+ka)
feeling dizzy                 isar cakranaa      sir cakrana (+ka)
health                        svaasqyaÊ saoht    svasthya (m.), sehat (f.)
healthy                       svasqaÊ tnduàst    svastha, tandrust
ill                           baImaar/ibamaar    bcmar (m.)
indigestion                   bad–hj,amaI        bad-hazmc (f.)
injury                        caaoT              coT (f.)
itch                          KujalaI            khujlc (f.)
lame                          laMgaD,a           largRa (m.)
malaria                       malaoiryaa         maleriya (m.)
rash                          dad                dad (m.)
sneeze                        CIMk               chmk (f.)
sprain                        maaoca             moc (f.)
swelling                      saUjana            sejan (f.)
temperature                   bauK,ar            buxar (m.)
thirst                        Pyaasa             pyas (f.)
typhoid                       imayaadI bauK,ar   miyadc buxar (m.)
tuberculosis                  tpoidkÊ xaya       tapedik (m.), shaya (m.)
ulcer                         naasaUr            naser (m.)
unconscious                   baohaoSa           behosh


Colours
black                kalaa            kala
blue                 naIlaa           ncla
brown                BaUra            bhera
colour               rMga             rarga (m.)
green                hra              hara
312                                                       English–Hindi glossary


      orange           santrI       santrc
      pink             gaulaabaI    gulabc
      purple (dark)    baOMganaI    bqgnc
      purple (light)   jaamanaI     jamnc
      red              laala        lal
      sky blue         AasamaanaI   asmanc
      saffron          kosarI       kesarc
      white            safod        safed
      white (skin)     gaaora       gora
      yellow           pIlaa        pcla



      Family and relatives
      aunt
         father’s sister                     bauAa            bua
         father’s older brother’s wife       ta[-             tac
         father’s younger brother’s wife     caacaI           cacc
         mother’s brother’s wife             maamaI           mamc
         mother’s sister                     maaOsaI          mausc
                                             K,alaa           xala (Muslim)
      brother                                Baa[-            bhac
      brother-in-law
         husband’s older brother             jaoz             jeTh
         husband’s sister’s husband          nanadao[-        nandoc
         husband’s younger brother           dovar            devar
         wife’s brother                      saalaa           sala
         wife’s sister’s husband             saaáZ,U          skDhe
      child                                  baccaaÊ baccaI   bacca (m.), baccc (f.)
      daughter                               baoTI            beTc
      daughter-in-law                        bahU             bahe
      father                                 ipta             pita (Hindu-Sikh)
                                             Abbaa            abba (Muslim)
      father-in-law                          sasaur           sasur
      granddaughter
         daughter’s daughter                 daohtI           dohtc
         son’s daughter                      paotI            potc
      grandfather
         father’s father                     dada             dada
         mother’s father                     naanaa           nana
English–Hindi glossary                                                        313


grandmother
   father’s mother                     dadI          dadc
   mother’s mother                     naanaI        nanc
grandson
   daughter’s son                      daohta        dohta
   son’s son                           paota         pota
husband                                pit           pati (Hindu, Sikh)
                                       K,aivand      xavind (Muslim)
mother                                 maataÊ maaá   mata, mk (Hindu, Sikh)
                                       AmmaI         ammc (Muslim)
    mother-in-law                      saasa         sas
nephew
    brother’s son                      BatIjaa       bhatcja
    sister’s son                       Baaájaa       bhkja
niece
    brother’s daughter                 BatIjaI       bhatcjc
    sister’s daughter                  BaaájaI       bhkjc
relative                               irStodar      rishtedar
sister                                 bahna         bshsn
sister-in-law
    brother’s wife                     BaaBaI        bhabhc
    wife’s sister                      saalaI        salc
    husband’s sister                   nanad         nanad
son                                    baoTa         beTa
    son-in-law                         javaa[-       javac
uncle
    father’s older brother             ta}           tae
    father’s sister’s husband          fUfa          phepha
    father’s younger brother           caacaa        caca
    mother’s brother                   maamaa        mama
    mother’s sister’s husband          maaOsaa       mausa (Hindu, Sikh)
                                       K,alaU        xale (Muslim)
   wife                                p%naI         patnc (Hindu, Sikh)
                                       baIbaI        bcbc (Muslim)
                                       GarvaalaI     gharvalc


Food and drink
Foodgrains and flours
black beans            laaoiBayaa   lobhiya (m.)
chickpea flour         baosana      besan (m.)
314                                                                English–Hindi glossary


      chick peas                  Caolao          chole (m. pl.)
      corn                        mak[-           makac (f.)
      flour                       AaTa            aTa (m.)
      flour (refined)             maOda           msda (m.)
      lentils                     dala            dal (f.)
      kidney beans                rajamaaáh       rajmkh (f.)
      moog beans/lentils          maUága dala     mjg dal (f.)
      rice                        caavala         caval (m.)
      wheat                       gaohUá          geho (m.)



      Fruits and nuts
      almond               baadama              badam (m.)
      apple                saoba                sev (m.)
      apricot              K,umaanaI            xumani (f.)
      banana               kolaa                kela (m.)
      cashew nuts          kajaU                kaje (m.)
      fruit; dry fruit     flaÂ maovaa          phal (m.); meva (m.)
      grapes               AMgaUr               arger (m.)
      guava                Ama$d                amred (m.)
      lemon                naIMbaU/naImbaU      ncmbe (m.)
      mango                Aama                 am (m.)
      melon                KrbaUjaa             kharbeja (m.)
      orange               saMtra/santra        santra (m.)
      peach                AaD,U                aRe (m.)
      peanuts              maUágaflaI           mogphalc (f.)
      pear                 naaSaptI             nashpatc (f.)
      pistachio            iPasta               pista (m.)
      plum                 AalaUbauK,ara        alebuxara (m.)
      tangerine            naarMgaI             narargc (f.)
      walnut               AKraoT               akhroT (m.)
      watermelon           trbaUja              tarbej (m.)


      Vegetables
      beetroot           caukndr             cukandar (m.)
      bittergourd        krolaa              karela (m.)
      cabbage            bandgaaoBaI         bandgobhc (f.)
      courgette          taorI               torc (f.)
      cucumber           KIra                khcra (m.)
English–Hindi glossary                                                          315


fenugreek        maoqaI           methc (f.)
garlic           lahsauna         lshsun (m.)
ginger (fresh)   Adrk             adrak (f.)
mustard          sarsaaoM         sarsõ (m.)
okra             iBaMDI           bhiNDc (f.)
onion            Pyaaja,          pyaz (m.)
peas             maTr             maTar (m.)
potatoes         AalaU            ale (m.)
pumpkin          kd\dU            kadde (m.)
radish           maUlaI           melc (f.)
spinach          palak            palak (f.)
tomato           TmaaTr           TamaTar (m.)
vegetable        sabj,aI          sabzc (f.)


Herbs and spices
aniseed                     saaOMf                 sãjf (m.)
asafoetida                  hIMga                  hmg (f.)
bay leaves                  toja, p<aa             tez patta (m.)
black cardamom              baD,I [laayacaI        baRc ilayacc (f.)
black pepper (black)        kalaI imaca-           kalc mirca (f.)
cardamom                    [laayacaI              ilayacc (f.)
chilli                      imaca-Ê laala imaca-   mirca (f.), lal mirca (f.)
cinnamon                    dalacaInaI             dalccnc (f.)
cloves                      laaOMga                lãjg (m.)
coriander                   Qainayaa               dhaniya (m.)
cumin                       jaIra                  jcra (m.)
curry powder                krI pa]Dr              karc pauDar (m.)
ginger (dry)                saaOMz                 sãjTh (f.)
mango powder                AmacaUr                amcer (m.)
mint                        paOdInaa               paudcna (m.)
mixed spices                garma masaalaa         garam masala (m.)
mustard seeds               ra[-                   rac (f.)
nutmeg                      jaayafla               jayphal (m.)
saffron                     kosar                  kesar (m.)
salt                        namak                  namak (m.)
spices                      masaalaa/masaalao      masala/masale (m.)
tamarind                    [malaI                 imlc (f.)
turmeric                    hldI                   haldc (f.)
316                                                      English–Hindi glossary


      Food items (dishes), etc.
      alcoholic drinks        Saraba            sharab (f.)
      betel leaf              pana              pan (m.)
      betel nut               sauparI           suparc (f.)
      bread (Indian)          raoTIÊ capatI     roTc (f.), capatc (f.)
                              fulkaÊ naanaÊ     phulka (m.), nan (m.)
                              pUrIÊ praza       perc (f.), paraTha (m.)
                              kulcaaÊ BaTUra    kulca (m.), bhaTera (m.)
      bread (Western)         Dbala raoTI       Dabal roTc (f.)
      butter                  ma@Kna            makkhan (m.)
      buttermilk              lassaI            lassc (f.)
      cheese                  pnaIr             pancr (m.)
      coffee                  kaf,I             kafc (f.)
      curry (Indian)          kZ,I              kaRhc (f.)
      egg                     AMDa              aNDa (m.)
      food                    Kanaa             khana (m.)
          non-vegetarian      maaásaaharI       mksaharc
          vegetarian          SaakaharI         shakaharc
      juice                   rsa               ras (m.)
      lentils                 dala              dal (f.)
      meat                    maaásaÊ gaaoSt    mks (m.), goshta (m.)
      milk                    dUQa              dedh (m.)
      oil                     tola              tel (m.)
      purified butter         GaI               ghc (m.)
      sugar (white)           caInaI            ccnc (f.)
      sugar (brown)           Sa@kr             shakkar (f.)
      sweets                  imaza[-           miThac (f.)
      tea                     caaya             cay (f.)
      tobacco                 tmbaakU           tambake (m.)
      vinegar                 isarka            sirka (m.)
      water                   panaI             panc (m.), jal (m.)
      yoghurt                 dhI               dahc (m./f.)


      Cooking processes
      baking (oven cooking)         tndUrI           tanderc
      boiling                       ]baalanaa        ubalna (+ne)
      cooking                       pkanaa           pakana (+ne)
      cutting                       kaTnaa           kaTna (+ne)
      frying                        tlanaa           talna (+ne)
English–Hindi glossary                                                      317


grilling                       saMoknaa            sgkna (+ne)
grinding                       ipsanaa             pcsna (+ne)
kneading                       gaUádnaa            godna (+ne)
mixing                         imalaanaa           milana (+ne)
peeling                        CIlanaa             chclna (+ne)
roasting                       BaUnanaa            bhenna (+ne)
rolling                        baolanaa            belna (+ne)
seasoning                      tD,ka lagaanaa      taRka lagana (+ne)
sieving                        Cananaa             channa (+ne)
slicing                        caIrnaa             ccrna (+ne)



Tastes
bitter            kD,vaa                    kaRva
delicious/tasty   maj,aodar                 mazedar
savoury/salty     namakIna                  namkcn
sour              K+a                       khaTTa
spicy             masaalaodarÊ imaca-dar    masaledar, mircavala
                  caTpTa                    caTpaTa
sweet             maIza                     mcTha
taste             svaad                     svad
tasteless         fIkaÊ baosvaad            phcka, besvad



Numbers
Cardinal
  1 ek            ek                            14 caaOdh         caudah
  2 dao           do                            15 pnd`h          pandrah
  3 tIna          tcn                           16 saaolah        solah
  4 caar          car                           17 sa<arhÊ sa~h   sattrah
  5 paáca         pkc                           18 Azarh          aTharah
  6 Ch            che                           19 ]nnaIsa        unncs
  7 saat          sat                           20 baIsa          bcs
  8 Aaz           aTh                           21 [@kIsa         ikkcs
  9 naaO          nau                           22 baa[-sa        bacs
 10 dsa           das                           23 to[-sa         tecs
 11 gyaarh        gyarah                        24 caaObaIsa      caubcs
 12 baarh         barah                         25 pccaIsa        pacchcs
 13 torh          terah                         26 CbbaIsa        chabbcs
318                                              English–Hindi glossary


       27 sa<aa[-sa      sattacs     64 caaOMsaz         cãjsaTh
       28 Aza[-sa        aThacs      65 pOMsaz           pqsaTh
       29 ]natIsa        untcs       66 iCyaasaz         chiyasaTh
       30 tIsa           tcs         67 sarsaz           sarsaTh
       31 [k<aIsa        ikattcs     68 AD,saz           aRsaTh
       32 ba<aIsa        battcs      69 ]nah<ar          unhattar
       33 tOMtIsa        tqtcs       70 sa<ar            sattar
       34 caaOMtIsa      cãjtcs      71 [kh<ar           ikhattar
       35 PaOMtIsa       pqtcs       72 bah<ar           bahattar
       36 C<aIsa         chattcs     73 ith<ar           tihattar
       37 saOMtIsa       sqtcs       74 caaOh<ar         cauhattar
       38 AD,tIsa        aRatcs      75 pcah<ar          pachattar
       39 ]natalaIsa     untalcs     76 iCh<ar           chihattar
       40 caalaIsa       calcs       77 sath<ar          satahatta
       41 [ktalaIsa      iktalcs     78 Azh<ar           aThhattar
       42 byaalaIsa      byalcs      79 ]naasaI          unasc
       43 tMOtalaIsa     tqtalcs     80 AssaI            assc
       44 caaOvaalaIsa   cauvalcs    81 [kasaI           ikasc
       45 pOMtaalaIsa    pqtalcs     82 bayaasaI         bayasc
       46 iCyaalaIsa     chiyalcs    83 itrasaI          tirasc
       47 saOMtalaIsa    sqtalcs     84 caaOrasaI        caurasc
       48 AD,talaIsa     aRtalcs     85 pccaasaI         paccasc
       49 ]nacaasa       uncas       86 iCyaasaI         chiyasc
       50 pcaasa         pacas       87 sa<aasaI         sattasc
       51 [@yaavana      ikyavan     88 AT\zasaI         aTThasc
       52 baavana        bavan       89 navaasaI         navasc
       53 itrpna         tirpan      90 nabbao           nabbe
       54 caaOvana       cauvan      91 [@yaanavao       ikyanve
       55 pcapna         pacpan      92 bayaanavao       bayanve
       56 CPpna          chappan     93 itranavao        tiranve
       57 sa<aavana      sattavan    94 caaOranavao      cauranve
       58 AT\zavana      aTThavan    95 pcaanavao        pacanve
       59 ]nasaz         unsaTh      96 iCyaanavao       chiyanve
       60 saaz           saTh        97 satanavao        satanve
       61 [ksaz          iksaTh      98 Azanavao         aTThanve
       62 baasaz         basaTh      99 inanyaanavao     ninyanve
       63 itrosaz        tiresaTh   100 saaO             sau

      0                                SaUnyaÊ isaf,r   shenya, sifar
      150                              ek saaO pcaasa   ek sau pacas
      1,000                            hj,aar           hazar
      10,000                           dsa hj,aar       das hazar
English–Hindi glossary                                                            319


100,000 (a hundred thousand)              ek laaK         ek lakh
1,000,000 (a million)                     dsa laaK        das lakh
10,000,000 (ten million)                  ek kraoD,       ek karoR
1,000,000,000 (a billion)                 dsa kraoD,      das karoR
10,000,000,000 (ten billion)              Arba            arab
100,000,000,000 (a hundred billion)       dsa Krba        das arab
1,000,000,000,000 (a trillion)            Krba            kharab



Ordinal
first      phlaa     pshla
second     dUsara    desra
third      tIsara    tcsra
fourth     caaOqaa   cautha
fifth      paácavaaá pkcvk
(Afterwards just add the suffix vaaá -vk to the cardinal numbers.)



Fractions
1
  /4 (a quarter)                (ek) caaOqaa[- ek chauthac
1
  /2 (a half )                  AaQaa          adha
3
  /4 (three-quarters)           paOnaa         pauna
11/4 (one and a quarter)        savaa          sava (ek)
11/2 (one and a half )          DoZ,           DeRh
13/4 (one and three-quarters)   paOnao dao     paune do (i.e. the next number)
21/4                            savaa dao      sava do
21/2                            Za[-           Dhac (the numeral two is
                                                 incorporated in the word)
23/4                            paOnao tIna    paune tcn (i.e. the next number)
31/4                            savaa tIna     sava tcn
31/2                            saaZ,o tIna    saRhe tcn
33/4                            paOnao caar    paune car

Then follow the pattern given below to derive the other fractional
numbers.

    number + 1/4     sava + number
    number + 1/2     saRhe + number
    number + 3/4     paune + next number
320                                                                     English–Hindi glossary


      Decimal point
      decimal                       dSamalava             dashamlav
      (Example: 1.5                 ek dSamalava paáca    ek dashamlav pkc)



      Percentages
      Percentage                    Pa`itSat, fIsadI      pratishat, fcsdc
      (Example: 50%                 pcaasa Pa`itSat       pacas pratishat)



      Time

      Hours
      o’clock     bajao              baje
      1:15        savaa (ek)         sava (ek)
      1:30        DoZ,               DeRh
      1:45        paOnao dao         paune do (i.e. the next number)
      2:15        savaa dao          sava do
      2:30        Za[-               Dhac (the numeral two is incorporated in the word)
      2:45        paOnao tIna        paune tcn (i.e. the next number)
      3:15        savaa tIna         sava tcn
      3:30        saaZ,o tIna        saRhe tcn
      3:45        paOnao caar        paune car


         Examples
         iktnao             bajao           hOMÆ         va@t    @yaa     hOÆ
         kitne       baje hq? or                         vakta   kya      hs?
         how many o’clock are                            time    what     is
         What time is it?
         ek bajaa hO.                  ek baja hs.                It is 1 o’clock.
         DoZ, bajao hOM.               deRh baje hq.              It is 1:30.
         paOnao tIna bajao hOM.        paune tcn baje hq.         It is 2:45.


      9:00 am           savaoro/saubah ko naaO           savere/suba ke nau
      9:00 pm           rat ko naaO                      rat ke nau
      4:20              caar bajakr baIsa imanaT         car bajkar bcs minaT
English–Hindi glossary                                                           321


6:50        saat bajanao maoM dsa imanaT     sat bajne mg das minaT
year        saala                            sal (m.)
month       mahInaa                          mahcna (m.)
day         idna                             din (m.)
hour        GanTa                            ghanTa (m.)
minute      imanaT                           minaT (m.)
second      saOiknDÊ pla                     sskinD (m.), pal (m.)



Days of the week
Monday          saaomavaar                 somvar (Hindu-Sikh), pcr (Muslim)
Tuesday         maMgalavaar                margalvar
Wednesday       bauQavaar                  budhvar
Thursday        gau$vaarÊ baRhspit         guruvar, brihaspativar (Hindu–Sikh)
                jaummaorat                 jummerat (Muslim)
Friday          Sauk`vaar                  shukravar (Hindu–Sikh),
                jaummaa                    jumma (Muslim)
Saturday        Sainavaar                  shanivar (Hindu–Sikh),
                hF,ta                      hafta (Muslim)
Sunday          rivavaarÊ [tvaar           ravivar, itvar



Months
The names of the months of the Hindu and Muslim calendar
are different from the Christian calendar. However, the Christian
calendar is officially used, so the Indian pronunciation of the months
is given below:

January        janavarI                    janvarc
February       frvarI                      farvarc
March          maaca-                      marca
April          AP`aOla                     aprsl
May            ma[-                        mac
June           jaUna                       jen
July           jaulaa[-                    julac
August         Agast                       agasta
September      isatmbar                    sitambar
October        A@tUbar/A@TUbar             aktebar, akTebar
November       navambar                    navambar
December       idsambar                    disambar
322                                                    English–Hindi glossary


      Years

      The word ‘year’ when used as part of a date is translated as sana\ san.
      For instance, 1995 (the year) is sana\ ]nnaIsa saaO pcaanavao san unncs sau
      pacanve but one can not say ek hja,ar naaO saaO pcaanavao ek hazar nau sau
      pacanve.



      Professions

      doctor           Da^@Tr           Doctor
      driver           D/a[var          Driver
      hero             naayak           nayak
      heroine          naaiyaka         nayika
      lawyer           vakIla           vakcl
      policeman        puilasa vaalaa   pulis vala
      singer           gaayak           gayak
      teacher          AQyaapk          adhyapak
      washerman        QaaobaI          Dhobc
      writer           laoKk            lekhak



      Important verbs

      Hindi verbs are listed in the infinitive form.



      Abbreviations

         (intr.)       intransitive verb; does not take the nao ne postposition
                       in the perfect tenses
         (tr.)         transitive verb; takes the nao ne postposition in the perfect
                       tenses
         (+nao ne)     takes the nao ne postposition in the perfect tenses
         (–nao ne)     does not take the nao ne postposition in the perfect tenses
         (+/–nao ne)   may or may not take the nao ne postposition in the
                       perfect tenses
         (+kao ko)     takes the kao ko postposition with its subject; indicates
                       non-volitional action
English–Hindi glossary                                                           323


accept, agree    maananaa                   manna (+nao ne)
ache             dd- haonaa                 dard hona (+kao ko)
afraid           Dr laganaa                 Dar lagna (+kao ko)
agree            maananaa                   manna (+nao ne)
(be) angry       gaussaa haonaa             gussa hona
                 gaussaa krnaa              gussa karna (+nao ne)
become angry     gaussaa Aanaa              gussa ana (+kao ko)
appear           laganaaÊ naj,ar Aanaa      lagna, nazar ana (+kao ko)
be able to/can   saknaa                     sakna (–nao ne)
be               haonaa                     hona (–nao ne)
beat             maarnaa                    marna (+nao ne)
be born          x ka janma haonaa          x ka janma hona (–nao ne)
begin, start     Sauà haonaa                shuru hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                 Sauà krnaa                 shuru karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
break            taoD,naa                   toRna (+nao ne)
bring            laanaa                     lana (–nao ne)
burn             jalanaaÊ jalaanaa          jalna (intr.), jalana (tr.)
buy              K,rIdnaa                   xarcdna (+nao ne)
call             baulaanaa                  bulana (+nao ne)
catch            pkD,naa                    pakaRna (+nao ne)
celebrate        manaanaa                   manana (+nao ne)
change           badlanaa                   badalna (+/–nao ne)
choose           caunanaa                   cunna (+nao ne)
climb            caZ,naa                    caRhna (–nao ne)
collide          x sao Tkranaa              x se Takrana (+nao ne)
come             Aanaa                      ana (–nao ne)
compare          x kI y sao tulanaa krnaa   x kc y se tulna karna (+nao ne)
complain         x kI y sao iSakayat        x se y kc shikayat karna (+nao ne)
                      krnaa
complete         pUra krnaa                 pera karna (+nao ne)
converse         x sao baat krnaa           x se bat karna (+nao ne)
cost             laganaa                    x (amount) lagna (–nao ne)
count            igananaa                   ginna (+nao ne)
cover            Zknaa                      Dhakna (+nao ne)
cry              raonaaÊ icallaanaa         rona, cillana (–nao ne)
cut              kTnaaÊ kaTnaa              kaTna (intr.), kaTna (tr.)
dance            naacanaa                   nacna (+nao ne)
desire           x kI [cCa haonaa           x kc iccha hona (–nao ne)
die              marnaa                     marna (–nao ne)
disappear        gaayaba haonaa             gayab hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                 gaayaba krnaa              gayab karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
dislike          naapsand haonaa            napasand hona (+kao ko)
324                                                    English–Hindi glossary


                             naapsand krnaa        napasand karna (+nao ne)
      do                     krnaa                 karna (+nao ne)
      drink                  pInaa                 pcna (+nao ne)
      drink (alcohol)        Saraba pInaa          sharab pcna (+nao ne)
      drive                  (kar) calaanaa        [kar] calana (+nao ne)
      earn                   kmaanaa               kamana (+nao ne)
      enjoy                  maj,aa haonaa         maza hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                             maj,aa krnaa          maza karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
                             maj,aa laonaa         maza lena (tr.) (+nao ne)
      eat/dine               Kanaa Kanaa           khana khana (+nao ne)
      eat breakfast          naaSta krnaa          nashta karna (+nao ne)
      enter                  Gausanaa              ghusna (–nao ne)
      fall                   igarnaa               girna (–nao ne)
      feed                   iKlaanaa              khilana (+nao ne)
      feel sick              x kI tbaIyat K,raba   x kc tabcyat xarab hona (–nao ne)
                                  haonaa
      feel happy             KuSa haonaa           xush hona (–nao ne)
      feel sad               ]dasa haonaa          udas hona (–nao ne)
      fight                  laD,naa               laRna (–nao ne)
      finish                 K%ma haonaa           xatam hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                             K%ma krnaa            xatam karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
      fix, recover, repair   zIk haonaa            Thck hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                             zIk krnaa             Thck karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
      fly                    ]D,naaÊ ]D,anaa       uRna (intr.), uRana (tr.)
      forgive, pardon        maaf krnaa            maf karna (+nao ne)
      get down, descend      ]trnaa                utarna (–nao ne)
      give                   donaa                 dena (+nao ne)
      go                     jaanaa                jana (–nao ne)
      go back                vaapsa jaanaa         vapas jana (–nao ne)
      grind                  pIsanaa               pcsna (+nao ne)
      hate                   x sao naf,rt krnaa    x se nafrat karna (+nao ne)
      hear                   saunanaa              sunna (+nao ne)
                             saunaa[- donaa        sunac dena (+kao ko)
      hire                   ikrayao pr laonaa     kiraye par lena (+nao ne)
      hope                   x kI AaSaa haonaa     x kc asha hona (–nao ne)
      (get) hot              garmaI pD,naa         garmc paRna (–nao ne)
      (get) hurt             caaoT laganaa         coT lagna (+kao ko)
      inquire                pUCtaC krnaa          pechtach karna (+nao ne)
      invite                 x ko Gar Aanaa        x ke ghar ana (–nao ne)
                             x kao nyaaOta donaa   x ko nyauta dena (+nao ne)
      jump                   kUdnaa                kedna (–nao ne)
      kill                   maarnaa               marna (+nao ne)
English–Hindi glossary                                                       325


knock at           KTKTanaa              khaTkhaTana (+nao ne)
know               jaananaa              janna (+nao ne)
                   maalaUma haonaa       malem hona (+kao ko)
                   pta haonaa            pata hona (+kao ko)
(come to) know     pta laganaa           pata lagna (+kao ko)
laugh              hásanaa               hãsna (–nao ne)
learn              saIKnaa               sckhna (+nao ne)
like               psand haonaa          pasand hona (+ko)
                   psand krnaa           pasand karna (+nao ne)
                   AcCa laganaa          accha lagna (+kao ko)
love               x sao P`aoma haonaa   x se prem hona (+kao ko)
                   x sao P`aoma krnaa    x se prem karna (+nao ne)
live               rhnaa                 rshna (–nao ne)
look               doKnaa                dekhna (+nao ne)
make               banaanaa              banana (+nao ne)
meet               imalanaa              milna (–nao ne)
melt               ipGalanaa             pighalna (–nao ne)
mix                imalaanaa             milana (+nao ne)
need, want         caaihyaoÊ caahnaaÊ    cahiye (+kao ko), cahna (+nao ne)
                   x kI j,a$rt haonaa    x kc zarerat hona (+kao ko)
(be) nervous       Gabaranaa             ghabrana (–nao ne)
object             x pr eotraj,a krnaa   x par straz karna (+nao ne)
open               KulanaaÊ Kaolanaa     khulna (intr.), kholna (tr.)
order (someone;    Aa&a donaaÊ           agya dena (+nao ne)
but not something) hu@ma krnaa           huxam karna (+nao ne)
peel               CIlanaa               chclna (+nao ne)
permit             [jaaja,t donaa        ijazat dena (+nao ne)
persuade           manaanaa              manana (+nao ne)
place              rKnaa                 rakhna (+nao ne)
play               Kolanaa               khelna (+nao ne)
play (instrument)  bajaanaa              bajana (+nao ne)
praise             x kI tarIf, krnaa     x kc tarcf karna (+ne)
prepare            tOyaar haonaa         taiyar hona (intr.) (–nao ne)
                   tOyaar krnaa          taiyar karna (tr.) (+nao ne)
pour               Dalanaa               Dalna (+nao ne)
press              dbaanaa               dabana (+nao ne)
push               Qakolanaa             dhakelna (+nao ne)
put off            Talanaa               Talna (+nao ne)
put                rKnaaÊ Dalanaa        rakhna (+nao ne), Dalna (+nao ne)
quarrel            laD,naa               laRna (–nao ne)
rain               baairSa haonaa        barish hona (–nao ne)
reach              phuácanaa             pahjcna (–nao ne)
326                                                 English–Hindi glossary


      read                 pZ,naa               paRhna (+nao ne)
      recognize            phcaananaa           pshcanna (+nao ne)
      refuse, prohibit     x sao manaa krnaa    x se mana karna (+nao ne)
      remember             yaad haonaa          yad hona (intr. +kao ko)
      remember,            yaad krnaa           yad karna (+nao ne)
         memorize
      respect              x kI [jj,a,t krnaa   x kc izzat karna (+nao ne)
      rest                 Aarama krnaa         aram karna (+nao ne)
      return, come back    vaapsa AanaaÊ        vapas ana (–nao ne)
                           laaOTnaa             lauTna (–nao ne)
      return (something)   vaapsa krnaa         vapas karna (+nao ne)
                           laaOTanaa            lauTana (+nao ne)
      ripe                 pknaa                pakna (–nao ne)
      rise                 ]znaaÊ caZ,naa       uThna (–nao ne), caRhna (–nao ne)
      run                  daOD,naaÊ Baaganaa   dauRna (–nao ne), bhagna (–nao ne)
      say                  khnaa                kshna (+nao ne)
      seem                 laganaa              lagna (+kao ko)
      sell                 baocanaa             becna (+nao ne)
      send                 Baojanaa             bhejna (+nao ne)
      show                 idKanaa              dikhana (+nao ne)
      (take) shower        nahanaa              nahana (+/–nao ne)
      sing                 gaanaa               gana (+nao ne)
      sit                  baOznaa              bsThna (–nao ne)
      sleep                saaonaa              sona (–nao ne)
      slip                 ifsalanaa            phisalna (–nao ne)
      sneeze               CIMknaa              ch mkna (+/–nao ne)
      snow                 baf,- igarnaa        barf girna (–nao ne)
      speak                baaolanaa            bolna (+/–nao ne)
      spend (money)        Kca- krnaa           xarca karna (+nao ne)
      spend (time)         ibatanaaÊ kaTnaa     bitana (+nao ne), kaTna (+nao ne)
      spill                igaranaa             girana (+nao ne)
      spread               ibaCanaa             bichana (+nao ne)
      stand                KD,a haonaa          khaRa hona (–nao ne)
      stay                 rhnaaÊ zhrnaa        rshna (–nao ne), Thshsrna (–nao ne)
      steal                caaorI krnaa         corc karna (+nao ne)
      stop                 àknaaÊ raoknaa       rukna (intr.), rokna (tr.)
      study                pZ,naa               paRhna (+/–nao ne)
      (be) surprised       hOrana haonaa        hsran hona (–nao ne)
      swim                 tOrnaa               tsrna (–nao ne)
      take care of         doK–Baala krnaa      dekh-bhal karna (+nao ne)
      take                 laonaa               lena (+nao ne)
      taste                caKnaa               cakhna (+nao ne)
English–Hindi glossary                                                          327


teach                pZ,anaa                paRhana (+nao ne)
telephone            TOlaIf,aona krnaa      Tslcfon karna (+nao ne)
tell, mention        batanaa                batana (+nao ne)
think                x ka #,yaala haonaa    x ka xyal hona (–nao ne)
                     saaocanaa              socna (+nao ne)
throw                fMoknaa                phgkna (+nao ne)
tired                qaknaa                 thakna (–nao ne)
touch                CUnaa                  chena (+nao ne)
try                  x kI kaoiSaSa krnaa    x kc koshish karna (+nao ne)
turn                 mauD,naaÊ maaoD,naa    muRna (intr.) moRna (tr.)
turn over            plaTnaa                palaTna (+nao ne)
understand           samaJanaa              samajhna (+/–nao ne)
use                  x ka [stomaala krnaa   x ka istemal karna (+nao ne)
uproot               ]KaD,naa               ukhaRna (+nao ne)
wait                 x ka [Mtaja,ar krnaa   x ka intzar karna (+nao ne)
wake up              ]znaa                  uThna (–nao ne)
walk                 calanaa                calna (–nao ne)
want, need           caaihyaoÊ caahnaa      cahiye (+kao ko), cahna (+nao ne)
wash                 Qaaonaa                dhona (+nao ne)
waste                gavaaánaa              gavkna (+nao ne)
wear                 phnanaa                pshsnna (+nao ne)
weep                 raonaa                 rona (–nao ne)
win                  jaItnaa                jctna (+/–nao ne)
worry                x kI icanta krnaa      x kc cinta karna (+nao ne)
worship              x kI pUjaa krnaa       x kc peja karna (+nao ne)
write                ilaKnaa                likhna (+nao ne)



   Web resource

   The following link is useful for translating English words into
   Hindi:

      http://shabdkosh.com/
328                                               Hindi–English glossary




      ihndI-AMga`oja,I SabdavalaI
      hindc-argrezc
      shabdavalc
      Hindi–English glossary




      The Hindi vocabulary used in the dialogues and reading practice
      pieces is presented below in roman alphabetical order. However, it
      should be pointed out that the vowel symbol s follows y, whereas
      the nasalized vowels (with ~) and short vowels precede their corre-
      sponding oral long vowels, respectively.

      ABaI           abhc                right now
      ABaI BaI       abhc bhc            even now
      AcCa           accha               good, Okay
      AcCa[-         acchac (f.)         good (n.), quality, ideal
      AcCa laganaa   accha lagna (+ko)   to like
      Af,saaosa      afsos (m.)          sorrow (m.)
      Agalaa         agla                next
      Akala pD,naa   akal paRna (–ne)    famine to occur
      Akolaa         akela               alone
      Aksar          aksar               often, usually
      AmaIr          amcr                rich
      Anaaja         anaj (m.)           grain, corn
      Andaja         andaz (m.)          style
      AnQakar        andhkara (m.)       darkness
      AMga`oja,      argrez (m.)         the English
      AMga`oja,I     argrezc (f.)        the English language
      Apnaa          apna                one’s own
      Apnaanaa       apnana (+ne)        to adopt
Hindi–English glossary                                                      329


Aqa-             artha (m.)          meaning
Aja,-            arz (f.)            request
Asala maoM       asal mg             in fact, in reality
AsalaI           aslc                real, genuine
ATUT             aTeT                unbreakable
AaOr             aur                 and, more, other, else
AaOr BaI         aur bhc             even more
AaOrt            aurat (f.)          woman
AyaaoQyaa        ayodhya (f.)        Ayodhya (place name)
AaáK             kkh                 eye
Aadaba           adab                salutation, greetings
Aaid             adi                 etc.
Aadt             adat                habit
AadmaI           admc                man
Aaga             ag                  fire
Aaja–kla         aj-kal              nowadays
Aak`maNa krnaa   akramaNa            to attack
                    karna (+ne)
Aama             am                  mango (n.); common (adj.), general
Aanaa            ana (–ne)           to come
Aanao vaalaa     ane vala            about to come
Aap              ap                  you (honorific)
Aapko            apke                your
Aapkao           apko                to you
Aarama           aram (m.)           comfort, rest
Aarama krnaa     aram karna (+ne)    to rest
AaTa             aTa (m.)            flour

bacaanaa         bacana (+ne)        to save
baccaa           bacca (m.)          child
bacapna          bacpan (m.)         childhood
bahut            bahut               very
bahut KUba       bahut xeb           great! splendid!
bajao            baje                o’clock
banaanaa         banana (+ne)        to make
banaarsa         banaras             Banaras (one of the oldest cities of
                                        India)
band             banda               closed
band haonaa      banda hona (–ne)    to be closed
band krnaa       banda karna (+ne)   to close
bananaa          banna (–ne)         to be made
330                                                  Hindi–English glossary


      banavaasa           banvasa (m.)      exile, residence in forest
      baD,a               baRa              big
      baZ,naa             baRhna (–ne)      to increase, advance
      batanaa             batana (+ne)      to tell
      baaáQanaa           bkdhna (+ne)      to tie
      baahr               bahar             outside, out
      baar                bar (f.)          time
      baarh               barah             twelve
      baat                bat (f.)          matter, conversation, topic
      baocanaa            becna (+ne)       to sell
      baokar              bekar             useless
      baoTa               beTa (m.)         son
      baoTI               beTc (f.)         daughter
      Ba[-                bhac              hey, well (excl.)
      Barnaa              bharna (+ne)      to fill
      Baaganaa            bhagna (–ne)      to run
      Baagato             bhagte (present   running
                             participle)
      Baa[-               bhac (m.)         brother/brothers
      Baart               bharat (m.)       India
      BaartIya            bharatcya         Indian
      Baoja donaa         bhej dena (+ne)   to send (compound verb)
      Baojanaa            bhejna (+ne)      to send
      BaoMT               bhgT              gift
      BaI                 bhc               also
      BaUlanaa            bhelna (+/–ne)    to forget
      BaUt                bhet (m.)         ghost, past
      ibajalaI            bijlc (f.)        electricity, lightning
      ibamaarI/baImaarI   bimarc (f.)       illness
      ibanaa              bina              without
      ibaMdI              bindc (f.)        dot
      baIbaI              bcbc (f.)         wife
      baImaa              bcma (m.)         insurance
      baaolanaa           bolana (+/–ne)    to speak
      baRndavana          brindavan         Brindavan (the place where Lord
                                               Krishna was brought up)
      bauJaanaa           bujhana (+ne)     to extinguish
      baura               bura              bad
      baura[-             burac (f.)        evil
      bau#aar             buxar (m.)        fever
      bahna               bshsn (f.)        sister
      baOra               bsra (m.)         waiter
Hindi–English glossary                                                    331


caKnaa            cakhna (+ne)       to taste
calaanaa          calana (+ne)       to drive, to manage (business), to
                                       light /play firecrackers
calanaa           calna (–ne)        walk
caaOdh            cauda              fourteen
caaád             ckd (m.)           moon
caaádnaI          ckdnc              moonlit
caaihyao/caaihe   cahiye (+ko)       desire, want
caahnaa           cahna (+ne)        to want
caar              car                four
caaya             cay (f.)           tea
Cata              chata (m.)         umbrella
iCpa kr           chipa kar          secretly
CaoD,naa          choRna (+ne)       to leave
CaoTa             choTa              small
caIna             ccn (m.)           China
caInaI            ccnc               Chinese, sugar
icallaanaa        cillana (–ne)      to scream
ica<aaOD,         cittauRa (m.)      Chitaur (a very famous historical
                                       place in Rajasthan)
caaor             cor (m.)           thief
caaorI krnaa      corc karna (+ne)   to steal
krI/kZ,I          curry (f.)         curry
caUáik            coki               because

dF,tr/dftr        daftar (m.)        office
dhI               dahc (m./f.)       yoghurt
dd-               dard (m.)          pain, ache
drvaaj,aa         darvaza (m.)       door
dsa               das                ten
dst               dasta (m.)         diarrhoea
daOD,naa          dauRna (–ne)       to run
dvaa[-            davac/dava (f.)    medicine
Da^@Tr            DakTar (m.)        doctor
Dalanaa           Dalna (+ne)        to put in, throw, pour
dama              dam (m.)           price
doKnaa            dekhna (+ne)       to see, to look at, to notice
dor               der (f.)           delay, time (period of, slot of )
doSa              desh (m.)          country
Qanyavaad         dhanyavad          thanks
Qama-             dharma (m.)        religion
Qaagaa            dhaga (m.)         (bracelets of ) thread
332                                                    Hindi–English glossary


      QaUma–Qaama sao   dhem-dham se          with pomp and show
      idKanaa           dikhana (+ne)         to show
      idllaI            dillc (f.)            Delhi (the capital city)
      idmaaga,          dimag (m.)            brain
      idna              din (m.)              day
      dao               do                    two
      daonaaoM          donõ                  both
      dIpk / idyaa      dcpak/diya (m.)       an earthen lamp
      dIvaalaI          dcvalc                the festival of lights/lamps
      daost             dost (m.)             friend
      duinayaa          duniya (f.)           world
      dUr               der                   far, distant
      dUr krnaa         der karna (+ne)       to dispel, to eliminate
      dUsara            desra                 second, other, another

      ek                ek                    one
      ek dao            ek-do                 one or two
      ek dUsaro sao     ek desre se           with one another, each other
      ek–saa            ek-sa                 alike

      f,irSta           farishta (m.)         angel
      f,k-              farka (m.)            difference
      fja,-             farz (m.)             duty
      fsala             fasal (f.)            crop
      fursat            furasat (f.)          free time, spare time, leisure

      galat             galat                 wrong
      galat–f,hmaI      galat-fahamc (f.)     misconception, misunderstanding
      galao lagaanaa    gale lagana (+ne)     to embrace
      gayao/gae         gaye                  went
      gaaáva            gkv (m.)              village
      gaaáva vaalaa     gkv vala (m.)         villager
      gaanaa            gana (m.), v. (+ne)   song (n.), to sing (v.)
      gaaD,I            gaRc (f.)             train, vehicle, cart
      GanTa/GaMTa       ghanTa (m.)           hour
      Gar               ghar (m.)             house
      GaaoD,a           ghoRa (m.)            horse
      GaaoD,I           ghoRc (f.)            mare
      igananaa          ginna (+ne)           to count
      gaaolaI           golc (f.)             tablet, pill; bullet
      gaujarat          gujarat (m.)          the State of Gujarat
      gaumanaa          gumna (–ne)           to be lost
Hindi–English glossary                                                             333


gaussaa            gussa (m.)               anger
gauzlaI            guThlc (f.)              stone (of a fruit)
gyaarh             gyarah                   eleven

hmaaro yahaá       hamare yahk              at our place (house, country, etc.)
hmaoSaa            hamesha                  always
hranaa             harana (+ne)             to defeat
hvaa               hava (f.)                air, wind
hvaa[- AD\Da       havac aDDa (m.)          airport
hja,ar             hazar                    thousand
haá                hk                       yes
hala               hal (m.)                 condition
halaaáik           halkki                   although
haqa               hath (m.)                hand
ihndu/ihndU        hindu/hinde              a Hindu
ihndustana         hindustan (m.)           India
ihndustanaI        hindustanc               Indian
hao                ho                       are (you; tuma)
haolaI             holc (f.)                the festival of colours
haonaa             hona (–ne)               to be
hukma              hukam (m.)               order
hUá                ho                       am
hOM                hq                       are
hO                 hs                       is

[Mtjaar/[ntja,ar   intzar (m./f.)           wait
[Mtjaar krnaa      intzar karna (+ne)       to wait
[sailayao          isliye                   therefore, so, thus, because of this
[tnaa              itna (m. adj.)           so much/many, this much/many
[tnao maoM         itne mg                  in the meantime
[-saa[-            csac                     a Christian

jaba               jab (relative pronoun)   when
jaba ik            jab ki                   while
jahaja,            jahaz (m.)               a ship, vessel, plane
jalaanaa           jalana (+ne)             to light, to burn; to kindle
jaldI              jaldc (f.)               quickly, hurry
janma              janma (m.)               birth
javaaba            javab (m.)               answer
javaaba donaa      javab dena (+ne)         to answer, reply
jaanaa             jana (–ne)               to go
jaanao vaalao      jane vale                going, about to go
334                                                  Hindi–English glossary


      jaanao dao      jane do               let (someone) go
      jaanavar        janvar (m.)           animal
      jaoba           jeb (f.)              pocket
      jaoba kaTnaa    jeb kaTna (+ne)       to pick-pocket
      jaI             jc                    honorific word
      jaIvana         jcvan (m.)            life
      jaOsaa          jssa                  as
      jaOsao ik       jsse (ki)             as, as if
      jvaalaamauKI    jwalamukhc (m.)       volcano

      kba             kab                   when
      kBaI            kabhc                 ever
      kBaI–kBaI       kabhc kabhc           sometimes
      kBaI nahIM      kabhc nahm            never
      khaá            kahk                  where
      khanaI          kahanc (f.)           story
      k[-             kac                   several
      kla             kal                   yesterday, tomorrow
      kma             kam                   less
      kmara           kamra (m.)            room
      krIba           karcb                 about, approximately
      krnaa           karna (+ne)           to do
      kqaa            katha (f.)            story
      kTnaa           kaTna (–ne)           to be cut
      kaOna           kaun                  who
      kaOna saa       kaun sa               which one
      ka              ka                    of
      kafI            kafc                  enough, sufficient
      kagaja,         kagaz (m.)            paper
      kama haonaa     kam hona (+ko)        to have work
      kaTnaa          kaTna (+ne)           to cut
      ko baad         (ke) bad              after, later
      ko baaro maoM   ke bare mg            about, concerning
      ko ibanaa       (ke) bina             without
      ko ilayao       ke liye               for
      ko saaqa        ke sath               with, together
      ko Alaavaa      ke alava              besides, in addition to
      #aanaa          khana (m.), v (+ne)   food (n.), to eat (v.)
      #alanaayak      khalnayak (m.)        villain
      #aolanaa        khelna (+/–ne)        to play
      i#aD,kI         khiRkc (f.)           window
      #aaolanaa       kholna (+ne)          to open
Hindi–English glossary                                                   335


kIijae/kIijayao   kcjie             please do
iksa              kis               which
iksaI             kisc              someone
iksmat            kismat (f.)       fortune, fate
iktaba            kitab (f.)        book
iktnaa            kitna             how much/many?
kao[-             koc               some, any, someone, anyone
kuC               kuch              some
kula              kul               total
kursaI            kursc (f.)        chair
@yaa              kya               what
@yaa              kya!              what! I do not believe it!
@yaaoM            kyõ               why
@yaaoMik          kyõki             because
khnaa             kshna (+ne)       to say
khto hOM          kshte hq          is called, is said
kOsao             ksse              how

laala             lal               red
laanaa            lana (–ne)        to bring
lagaanaa          lagana (+ne)      to attach, to stick, to fix, apply
lagaBaga          lagbhag           about, approximately, almost
laganaa           lagna (+ko)       to seem, to be applied, to appear
laganaa           lagna (–ne)       to cost, to take (time)
laxmaI            lakshmc (f.)      Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth,
                                       fortune, prosperity
laMdna            landan            London
laD,a[-           laRac (f.)        fight, battle, war
laD,ka            laRka (m.)        boy
laD,kI            laRkc (f.)        girl
laaOTnaa          lauTana (–ne)     to return, to come
laoikna           lekin             but
laonaa            lena (+ne)        to take
ilaKnaa           likhna (+ne)      to write
laaoga            log (m.)          people
laaok kqaa        lok katha (f.)    folk tale

maClaI            machlc (f.)       fish
maha              maha              great
mahaBaart         mahabharat (f.)   one of the two greatest epics from
                                    Sanskrit
mahInaa           mahcna (m.)       month
336                                                    Hindi–English glossary


      mana               man (m.)             mind
      manapsand          man-pasand (f.)      favourite
      manaanaa           manana (+ne)         to celebrate (festival, holiday),
                                                 to persuade
      mad-               mard (m.)            man
      marIja,            marcz (m.)           patient
      marnaa             marna (–ne)          to die
      masaalaa           masala (m.)          spice
      masaalaodar        masaledar            spicy
      mat                mat                  not
      matlaba            matlab (m.)          meaning
      maaOka             mauka (m.)           opportunity
      maja,a krnaa       maza karna (+ne)     to enjoy
      maaása             mks (m.)             meat
      maalaUma haonaa    malem hona (+ko)     to know, to be known
      maata              mata (f.)            mother
      maoM               mg                   in, during
      maohrbaanaI        meharbanc (f.)       kindness
      imalanaa           milna (–ne)          to meet, to be available
      imalanaa           milna (+ko)          to find, to receive, to get
      imaca-             mirca (f.)           chilli peppers
      ima~               mitra (m.)           friend
      imaja,aja          mizaj (m.)           temperament, nature
      maugala            mugal                the Moguls
      mauJao             mujhe                (to) me
      maulaakat          mulakat (f.)         meeting
      maulaakat haonaa   mulakat hona (–ne)   to meet
      mauiSkla           mushkil              difficult, difficulty (f.)
      maOM               mq                   I
      mahágaa            mshqga               expensive
      mahla              mshsl (m.)           palace

      na . . . na        na . . . na          neither . . . nor
      naÆ                na?                  isn’t it?
      nahIM              nahm                 not
      nahIM tao          nahm to              otherwise
      nakla              nakal (f.)           copy, fake, imitation
      namak              namak (m.)           salt
      namasto            namaste              Hindu greeting and replies to the
                                                 greeting (may be used by other
                                                 religions too)
      nayaa              naya                 new
Hindi–English glossary                                                           337


naja,r             nazar (f.)            vision
naama              nam (m.)              name
naapsand           napasand (f.)         dislike
naaSta             nashta (m.)           breakfast
nao                ne                    agent marker in the perfective tenses

Aaoh               oh                    exclamation of pain/sorrow

phuácanaa          pahjcna (–ne)         to reach, arrive
pkD,naa            pakaRna (+ne)         to catch
planaa             palna (–ne)           to be brought up
pMi@t/pMi>         parkti (f.)           line, row
pr                 par                   on, at
praijat haonaa     parajit hona (–ne)    to be defeated
proSaana           pareshan              troubled
prhoja,            parhez (m.)           abstinence
prhoja, krnaa      parhez karna (+ne)    to abstain, avoid
pZ,naa             paRhna (–ne)          to study
pZ,naa             paRhna (+ne)          to read
pirvaar            parivar (m.)          family
pD,naa             paRna (–ne)           to fall, to lie down,
psand              pasand (f.)           choice, liking
piScama            pashcim (m.)          west
piScamaI           pashcimc              western
pta                pata (m.)             address
pta laganaa        pata lagna (+ko)      to come to know
pTa#aa             paTaxa (m.)           a firecracker
p~a                patra (m.)            astrological chart
piva~ta            pavitrata (f.)        purification, holiness
panaa              pana (+ne)            to find, obtain
panaI              panc (m.)             water
pasa               pas                   near
fla                phal (m.)             fruit
foMknaa            phgkna (+ne)          to throw
ifr                phir                  again, then
fulaJaD,I          phul-jhaRc (f.)       a kind of firework which emits
                                         flower-like sparks
ipcakarI           pickarc (f.)          a syringe-shaped water-gun made of
                                            wood or metal
pIlaa              pcla                  yellow
pInaa              pcna (+ne)            to drink
Pa`cailat haonaa   pracalit hona (–ne)   to be prevalent
338                                                    Hindi–English glossary


      Pa`acaIna        praccn                 ancient
      Pa`kaSa          prakasha (m.)          light
      Pa`sannata       prasannta (f.)         happiness, joy
      P`aisaw          prasiddha              famous
      Pa`tIk           pratcka (m.)           symbol
      Pao`ma           prema (m.)             love
      puilasa vaalaa   pulis vala (m.)        policeman
      puranaa          purana                 old (inanimate)
      pustkalaya       pustakalaya            library
      pUCnaa           pechna (–ne)           to ask
      pUjana           pejana (n.)            worship
      pUra             pera                   complete, whole, full
      pUra krnaa       pera karna (+ne)       to complete
      Pyaar            pyar (m.)              love
      phlaa            pshla                  first
      phlao            pshle                  (at) first, ago, previously
      pOsaa            pssa (m.)              money (one hundredth of a rupee)

      rxaa–banQana     raksha-bandhban (m.)   the festival of love
      rxaa krnaa       raksha karna (+ne)     to protect, to defend
      rMga             rarga (m.)             colour
      rMga ibarMgaa    rarga-birarga          colourful
      rMgaIna          rargcn                 colourful
      rajaa            raja (m.)              king, emperor
      rajya            rajya (m.)             kingdom
      raxasa           rakshasa (m.)          demon
      rama             rama (m.)              Lord Rama (proper name)
      ranaI            ranc (f.)              queen
      rat              rat (f.)               night
      ravaNa           ravaNa (m.)            the demon king, Ravana
      roSama           resham (m.)            silk
      roSamaI          reshmc                 silken
      ?tu              ritu (f.)              season
      irvaaja          rivaj (m.)             custom
      àknaa            rukna (–ne)            to stop
      àpyaa            rupaya (m.)            rupees (Indian currency)
      rhnaa            rshna (–ne)            live

      saba             sab                    all
      sabja,I          sabzc (f.)             vegetable
      saca             sac (m.)               truth, true
      saca             sac!                   truth! It can’t be true!
Hindi–English glossary                                                   339


saknaa            sakna (–ne)         can, be able to
salaah            salah (f.)          advice
salaah laonaa     salah lena (+ne)    to seek/take advice
salaah maananaa   salah manna (+ne)   to accept/take advice
salaama           salam (m.)          Muslim greeting and reply to the
                                         greeting
samaJanaa         samajhna (+/–ne)    to understand
samaya            samaya (m.)         time
sama`aT           samraT (m.)         king, emperor
saMdoSa           sandesh (m.)        message
saMgaIt           sargct (m.)         music
saMskRt           sanskrita (f.)      Sanskrit
sava-–iPa`ya      sarva-priya         loved by all, the most favourite
saaO              sau                 hundred
savaala           saval (m.)          question
savaora           savera (m.)         morning
saaihba           sahib (m.)          sir
saala             sal (m.)            year
saamaana          saman (m.)          baggage, goods, stuff, tools
saaD,I            saRc (f.)           saree
saat bajao        sat baje            seven o’clock
sao               se                  from, with, by, than
saovaa            seva (f.)           service
SaadI             shadc (f.)          marriage
SaadI–Sauda       shadc-shuda         married
Saama             sham (f.)           evening
Saanadar          shandar             splendid, great
Saayad            shayad              perhaps
Sabd              shabda (m.)         word
SarIr             sharcr (m.)         body
SatabdI           shatabdc (m.)       century
Sa~u              shatru (m.)         enemy
Sa~uta            shatruta (f.)       enmity, hostility
SaaOk             shauk (m.)          hobby, fondness, interest
EaIkRYNa          shrc krishna        Lord Krishna
SauBa             shubha              auspicious
Sauik`yaa         shukriya (m.)       thanks
Sauà krnaa        shuru karna (+ne)   to begin
Sahr              shshsr (m.)         city
saIKnaa           sckhna (+ne)        to learn
isaMgaar          sirgar (m.)         make up
isar              sir (m.)            head
340                                                   Hindi–English glossary


      isaf,-          sirf                   only
      saaocanaa       socna (+ne)            to think
      saaolahvaIM     solvm                  sixteenth
      saubah          suba (f.)              morning
      saulatana       sultan (m.)            a Sultan, king, emperor
      saunahra        sunhara (m. adj.)      golden
      saunato hI      sunte hc               as soon as (someone) heard
      saUKa           sekha (m. adj.)        dry
      saUt            set (m.)               cotton
      saUtI           setc                   cotton (adj.)
      saOinak         ssnik (m.)             soldier

      taja            taj (m.)               crown
      tajamahla       taj mshsl (m.)         the Taj Mahal
      tba tk          tab tak                by then
      tbaIyat         tabcyat (f.)           health, disposition
      tklaIf          taklcf (f.)            trouble, bother
      tklaIf donaa    taklcf dena (+ne)      to bother
      tlaak           talak (m.)             divorce
      tr              tar                    wet
      trI             tarc (f.)              liquid
      tSarIf,         tashrcf (f.)           (a term signifying respect)
      tSarIf laanaa   tashrcf lana (–ne)     to grace one’s place, welcome, come
      tSarIf, rKnaa   tashrcf rakhna (+ne)   to be seated
      toja,           tez                    fast, quick, sharp, strong
      qaa             th a                   was
      zIk             Thck                   fine, okay
      zIk–zak         Thck-Thak              fine, hale and hearty
      TIka lagaanaa   Tcka lagana (+ne)      to give an injection/a shot
      taohfa          tohfa                  gift
      qaaoD,a         thoRa                  little, few
      tao             to (particle)          to, then, as regards
      %yaaOhar        tyauhara (m.)          festival
      tOrnaa          tsrna (–ne)            to swim

      ]ma`            umar (f.)              age
      ]phar           uphar                  gift
      ]%saah          utsah (m.)             enthusiam, joy, zeal
      ]<araiQakarI    uttaradhikarc (m.)     heir, inheritor

      vacana          vacan (m.)             promise
      vah/vaao        vah/vo                 that, he, she
Hindi–English glossary                                                      341


vahI              vahc (vah+hc)        same, that very
vaYa-             varsha (m.)          year
vasant            vasanta (m.)         spring
vaah              vah                  ah! excellent! bravo!
vaah! vaah!       vah! vah!            wow! wow! bravo!
vaapsa            vapas                back
vaapsa Aanaa      vapas ana (–ne)      to come back
vaatavarNa        vatavaraNa (m.)      atmosphere, environment
ivadoSaI          videshc (m.)         foreigner
ivajaya           vijaya (f.)          victory
ivanatI           vintc (f.)           request
vah kOsao         vo ksse              how come?
vaOsao            vsse                 otherwise, in addition, like that,
                                          similarly

#a,raba           xarab                bad
#a,rIdnaa         xarcdna (+ne)        to buy
#atrnaak          xatarnak             dangerous
#a,tra            xatra (m.)           danger
#,yaala           xayal                opinion, view
#a,asakr          xaskar               especially, particularly
#a,ud             xud                  oneself
#,auda haif,ja,   xuda hafiz           goodbye
#,auSa–halaI      xush-halc (f.)       prosperity
#,a,uSabaU        xushbe               fragrance (lit. happy smell)
#,auSaI           xushc                happiness
#aO,iryat         xsriyat (f.)         safety, welfare

yahaá             yahk                 here
yahaá tk ik       yahk tak ki          to the point, to the extent that
yaa               ya                   or
yaad idlaanaa     yad dilana (+ne)     to remind
yaanaI            yanc                 that is, in other words

j,ara             zara                 little, somewhat
ja$r              zarer                of course, certainly
ja$rt             zarerat (f.)         need, necessity
ja$rI             zarerc               important, urgent, necessary
ja,aor sao        zor se               loudly
j,aaor donaa      zor dena (+ne)       to emphasize
jy,aada           zyada (invariable)   more
342                                               Hindi–English glossary



      Web resource
      The following link is useful for translating Hindi into English:

         http://shabdkosh.com/
Index                                                                         343




Index


adjectives 76–8, 256–7                constructions
   comparative 143                      dative/ko 119–20, 164–6
   derived 134                          desirative 144
   possessive 77                        ergative/ne 166–7
   superlative 5                        generic 127
adverbs 226–7, 268                      vala 186–7
   agentive: vala 187                 context 104
  emphatic 151                        cross-cultural communication
agreement                               Bengali names 112
  adjectives/possessives (unmarked)     Bindi 110 –11
      76–8                              coping skills 84, 175
  object-verb 113–14                    eating etiquette 230
  subject-verb 112–13                   gift giving 255
ambiguity 227, 236                      hyper-politeness 177
  and pausing 215                       negotiation rules 101
article 263                             politeness 102–3, 203, 255
attention getter 83–4, 146              swastika, Indian 256
  bhac 146
attitude                              direct object maker 128
   linguistic 177
                                      echo words 162
capabilitatives                       English
  three types of 179–81                 nativization of 16, 82, 125, 171
case                                  ergative see constructions
  direct and oblique 106–7, 262–5     experiential see construction, dative
commands/imperative 278–9               and volitional verbs 119–20,
  irregular 152, 281                       164 –6
  polite 103, 279
conditionals                          food
  counter factives 203–4                Indian curry 230 –1
conjunction                           formulaic expressions 178, 188, 204
  aur 126
  modifier: aur 126                   gender 74–6, 259–60
consonants 2, 12–16                   Government of India 9–10
344                                                                      Index


      greetings                                negative 126, 205, 215
        Hindu-Sikh 68                          to 181
        Muslim 70                           passive 236–9
        regional variants 68                   agentless 238–47
                                               and past participle 227
      Hindi                                 Persian/Arabic 16
        history 2                           ‘please’ 103
        region 1                            plural
        speakers 1                             formation 74–6, 94–5
                                            politeness 68, 102
      information questions and             possession
         word order 72–3, 89                   inseparable 94
      International Phonetic Alphabet 10       separable/transferable 108
      intonation 56–7, 73                   postpositions 89
                                               compound 106–8, 267–8
      language acquisition and use 3           compound and oblique 106–7,
                                                  114, 147
      neither . . . nor 231–2                  deletion in purpose clause
      nouns                                       223–4
        marked nouns 94–5, 260–1               ‘ghost’ 113–14, 149
        number and gender 74–6, 94–5,          ne 160, 166–7
           259–60                              simple 267
        oblique plural 131                  ‘pro-drop’ languages 91
        unmarked nouns 74–6, 260–1          pronouns
        verbal see verbal infinitives/         contractive 135
           gerundives                          demonstrative 74
      numerals 21                              emphatic 151
                                               honorific 74
      object                                   the ne forms 167
        case marker 128                        personal 73–4, 264–5
        verb agreement 113–14, 120             possessive 77, 267–8
      obligatives                              possessive emphatic 267
        external 185                           reflexive 141–3, 189
        internal 178–9                      pronunciation
                                               schwa (a) deletion 30, 43–50
      participles                           punctuation 21
        agentive 187, 283–4
        ‘as soon as’ 194, 283               question tag 91
        conjunctive/absolutive/kar 283      question words 268
        past as adverbial 232–3               movement 72
        past and passives 238                 oblique 146–7
        past/perfective 225–6, 282            and word order 89, 269
        present/imperfective 213–15, 225,   questions
           281–2                              information 72, 89
      particles                               tag 91
        emphatic hc 151                       yes-no 73, 122
Index                                                                            345


reduplication                             subjunctive 188–9, 205, 273, 278
   distributive meaning 225               ‘to be’/copula/auxiliaries 92, 272–3
   plural meaning 122, 131             time expressions 151
   question 122                        transcription 24–5
relative clauses 248–9
   agentive 248                        verb
   directional 249                       agreement 113–14
   kind 249                              auxiliary/copular/‘to be’ 92, 272–3
   locative 249                          causative 209–11, 270–2
   manner 249                            complex 167–8
   quantitative 249                      compound 182, 192–5, 205, 211,
                                            233
sakna ‘can’, see capabilitatives         experiencer 119–20, 164–6
     140–1                               generic construction 127–8
Sanskrit 2, 16                           imperative, see commands
script                                   ‘to have’ 94, 108
   Brahmi 10                             irregular 161
   syllabic 9–10                         of knowledge 164–7
separable possessions 108                lagna 133
‘since’ 110                              milna ‘to find’ 208
social ritual 84                         negation and deletion 209, 239–40
stress 54                                simple past (transitive) 161,
styles                                      166–7
   Perso-Arabic 247                      volitional 160
   Sanskrit 247                        verbal nouns/infinitives 120–1, 144,
subject                                     269
   dative/experiencer/ko 119–20, 131     oblique 121
   marking 114                         vocabulary, basic 309–27
   omission 91, 104, 238               vowels 10–11
   and verb agreement 112–13
syllables 53                           ways of expressing
                                         asking price 101
tenses                                   capability 179–81
  future 148, 273, 277–8                 ‘go to the doctor’ 135
  future immediate 186                   ‘I am busy’ 188
  future irregular 281                   ‘I am full’ 227
  imperatives see commands               ‘I am glad to hear this’ 171
  past (the verb ‘to be’) 147, 273       ‘I am sorry to hear this’ 171
  past habitual 273–5                    ‘I love you’ 130–1
  past perfect 191, 277                  ‘I mean’ 171
  past progressive 280                   ‘I think’ 194–5
  past simple 159–60, 166 (ne),          ‘to know’ 164–5
     275–6                               ‘to like’ 133 ‘no’ 230
  present habitual 93, 112–13, 274       ‘opportunity of ’ 233
  present perfect 191, 276–7             ‘please’ 103
  progressives 147–8, 279–80             possession 94, 108, 114
346                                                                      Index


        ‘same’ or ‘alike’ 127                 and contrastive negation 215–16
        ‘take my advice’ 205                  focus or emphasis 181, 231
        ‘to wait’ 203                         SOV 72
        ‘want’ vs. ‘desire’ 102, 112          wh-words and movement 85–6
      word compounding 168
      word order 69, 72, 84–8, 91, 102–3,   yes-no questions 73
           106, 129, 144
Index                                                                   347



                    Related titles from Routledge


                         Colloquial Urdu
                            Tej K. Bhatia

  Colloquial Urdu is easy to use and completely up to date! Writ-
  ten by experienced teachers for self-study or class use, the course
  offers you a step by step approach to written and spoken Urdu.
  No prior knowledge of the language is required.
     What makes Colloquial Urdu your best choice in personal
  language learning?

  •     interactive – lots of exercises for regular practice
  •     clear – concise grammar notes
  •     practical – useful vocabulary and pronunciation guide
  •     complete – including answer key and special reference
        section

  By the end of this rewarding course you will be able to commun-
  icate confidently and effectively in Urdu in a broad range of
  everyday situations.


               ISBN13: 978-0-415-13540-5 (book)
                ISBN13: 978-0-415-28950-4 (cds)
          ISBN13: 978-0-415-44539-9 (book and cds pack)


                  Available at all good bookshops
          For ordering and further information please visit:
                        www.routledge.com
348                                                                Index



                       Related titles from Routledge


                    Hindi: An Essential Grammar
                           Rama Kant Agnihotri

      This text provides a reader-friendly guide to the structural pat-
      terns of modern standard Hindi. Ideal for both independent
      learners and classroom students alike, this book covers the
      essentials of Hindi grammar in readable, jargon-free sections.
         This edition includes:

      • sections on the speech sounds of Hindi
      • detailed analysis of Hindi sentence structure
      • full examples throughout.


                    ISBN13: 978-0-415-35670-1 (hbk)
                    ISBN13: 978-0-415-35671-8 (pbk)
                   ISBN13: 978-0-203-00282-7 (ebook)


                    Available at all good bookshops
            For ordering and further information please visit:
                          www.routledge.com
